<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Sleep Medicine Reviews

j o urnal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/smrv

## CLINICAL REVIEW

## Sleep disturbances and sleep disorders as risk factors for chronic postsurgical pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis

Giorgia Varallo a, b, 1 , Emanuele M. Giusti a, c, 1 , Chiara Manna a , Gianluca Castelnuovo a, b , Fabio Pizza d, e , Christian Franceschini f , Giuseppe Plazzi e, g, *

- a Department of Psychology, Catholic University of Milan, 20123, Milan, Italy
- b Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Psychology Research Laboratory, Ospedale San Giuseppe, 28824, Verbania, Italy
- c Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Psychology Research Laboratory, Ospedale San Luca, 20149, Milan, Italy
- d Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
- e IRCCS Istituto Delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna (ISNB), 40139, Bologna, Italy
- f Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, 43121, Parma, Italy
- g Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125, Modena, Italy

## a r t i c l e i n f o

## s u m m a r y

Article history:

Received 1 December 2021

Received in revised form

28 March 2022

Accepted 28 March 2022

Available online 7 April 2022

Keywords:

Sleep disorder

Sleep disturbance Sleep quality Chronic postsurgical pain Prevention Risk factor

This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed at evaluating the role of sleep disturbances and sleep disorders in in /uniFB02 uencing presence and intensity of chronic postsurgical pain (CPSP). We included cohort studies which enrolled adults, assessed sleep disturbances or disorders before surgery, measured pain intensity, presence of pain, or opioid use at least three months after surgery. Eighteen studies were included in a narrative synthesis and 12 in a meta-analysis. Sleep disturbances and disorders were signi /uniFB01 cantly related to CPSP, with a small effect size, r ¼ 0.13 (95% CI 0.06 e 0.20). The certainty of evidence was rated low due to risk of bias and heterogeneity. In subgroup analyses the above association was signi /uniFB01 cant in studies that used pain intensity as the outcome, but not in those that used presence of pain; in studies on patients who underwent total knee arthroplasty or other surgeries, but not in those on patients who had breast cancer surgery or total hip arthroplasty; in the single study that assessed insomnia and in studies that assessed sleep disturbances as predictors. A meta-regression showed that the follow-up length was positively associated with the overall estimate. Our /uniFB01 ndings suggest that presurgical sleep disturbances and disorders should be evaluated to detect patients at risk for CPSP.

Registration: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display\_record.php?RecordID ¼ 272654

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Introduction

Chronic postsurgical pain (CPSP) is de /uniFB01 ned as pain that develops or increases in intensity after a surgical intervention, persists for at

least three months, and affects the individual's quality of life [1]. CPSP is a long-term adverse event after surgical procedures that has a high incidence and that remains often undermanaged. Indeed, evidence suggests that 3% e 56% of patients experience chronic pain after common surgical interventions such as joint replacement surgery, cholecystectomy, or hernia repair, and that these percentages increase up to 80% after surgical interventions such as amputation and thoracotomy [2,3].

E-mail addresses:

giorgia.varallo@unicatt.it

(G.

Varallo), e.giusti@auxologico.it

(E.M. Giusti), chiara.manna@unicatt.it (C. Manna), gianluca.castelnuovo@unicatt.it

(G.

Castelnuovo), fabio.pizza@unibo.it

(F.

Pizza), christian.franceschini@unipr.it

(C. Franceschini), giuseppe.plazzi@isnb.it (G. Plazzi).

The most critical consequences of this condition are functional limitations, poorer quality of life, psychological distress, prolonged use of opioids, and high utilization and cost of health care [4]. Since chronic pain is dif /uniFB01 cult and costly to treat, and the available pharmacological treatments for the prevention of CPSP have shown underwhelming results, the identi /uniFB01 cation of modi /uniFB01 able risk factors is necessary to develop better prevention and risk reduction strategies [3,5,6]. Various presurgical and perioperative predictors of

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

CPSP have been identi /uniFB01 ed, such as genetic predisposition [7,8], female sex, younger age, preoperative pain, previous chronic pain [5], psychosocial factors [9 e 12], duration of surgery [2,13], surgical technique [14] and severity and duration of acute postsurgical pain [15 e 17]. Identifying patients at risk and providing preventive pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments tailored to the patient's risk factors has been suggested as a potential way to improve the ability of health systems to reduce the incidence of CPSP [5].

Despite the well-known nexus between sleep and pain [18], only recently research among modi /uniFB01 able risk factors has highlighted the emerging role of sleep disturbances and sleep disorders in the development of CPSP. For the purposes of this systematic review, the term ' sleep disturbance ' refers to poor sleep quality [19,20]. Sleep quality is a multifaceted term that encompasses quantitative aspects of sleep, including sleep duration and sleep latency, as well as more qualitative dimensions, such as ' depth ' or ' restfulness ' [21,22]. Differently, sleep disorders (e.g., insomnia, sleep-related breathing disorders, and central disorders of hypersomnolence) are conditions including subjective complaints variably coupled with objective evidence, according to the International Classi /uniFB01 cation of Sleep Disorders 3 (ICSD-3) or the International Classi /uniFB01 cation of Diseases 11 (ICD-11) [23,24].

Sleep and pain have a bidirectional relationship [25,26], with pain leading to sleep disturbances [27,28], and sleep disturbances contributing to increased pain [29 e 31]. However, in various chronic pain conditions, sleep disturbances have been found to be better predictors of increased pain than vice versa [30,32,33].

Regarding postsurgical pain, current evidence suggests that preoperative [34] and perioperative sleep disturbances and disorders are a risk factor for acute postsurgical pain [35 e 37]. However, it is less clear whether they are also risk factors for CPSP.

Our research aimed to evaluate if preoperative and perioperative sleep disturbances and disorders are risk factors for CPSP. We hypothesized that there would be a statistically signi /uniFB01 cant effect of both sleep disturbances and disorders on pain intensity, presence of pain, and opioid use after at least three months from surgery. We also aimed to explore without pre-existing hypotheses whether different operationalizations of sleep disturbances and disorders (e.g., self-reported sleep disturbances, sleep duration, medical diagnosis of sleep disorders) and different surgical procedures had a different impact on CPSP.

## Methods

## Search method and study selection

The reporting of this study follows the Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA 2020) guidelines [38]. The systematic review was registered on PROSPERO and can be accessed at https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display\_ record.php?RecordID ¼ 272654.

The electronic search was performed using the following electronic databases: PubMed, Embase, Scopus, and Web of Science. Details of the electronic search strategy are reported in the supplementary materials (Supplementary materials, Table S1). To reduce the presence of publication bias, the grey literature was also searched using Google Scholar, OpenGrey, and GreyNet. These searches were performed on August 1, 2021. Only records written in English, French, German, Italian, and Portuguese were considered. No publication date restrictions were applied.

Studies were included if: 1) they were retrospective or prospective cohort studies; 2) sleep disturbances and sleep disorders were assessed using polysomnography, clinical diagnosis, or validated questionnaires during the preoperative and perioperative period; 3) the intensity of pain, the presence of pain, and/or the use of opioids were evaluated at follow-up after at least three months from the surgical intervention; and 4) adult patients undergoing any type of surgery were included. Studies were excluded if they included participants with age &lt; 18.

The records retrieved during the electronic search were uploaded to the online software Rayyan [39]. A reviewer supervised the deletion of duplicate records. Then, two reviewers independently screened the titles and abstracts of the remaining records according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The interrater agreement for the screening of the articles, measured using Cohen's k, was moderate (k ¼ 0.79). Con /uniFB02 icts were resolved by consensus.

Then, the records of the articles were uploaded to the CADIMA online software. Two reviewers accessed the full text of records and decided on their inclusion or exclusion in the review. When reviewers had concerns about the inclusion or exclusion of abstracts from conference proceedings due to a lack of information, the authors of those abstracts were contacted by email and asked for additional information. Disagreements between reviewers were resolved by consensus. The studies that met the inclusion criteria and did not meet any of the exclusion criteria were included in the systematic review. Studies presented in multiple records (e.g., multiple scienti /uniFB01 c articles, or both articles and conference proceedings) were considered as individual studies.

Data extraction

Two reviewers independently extracted data using a prespeci /uniFB01 ed structured form using the CADIMA web tool. The following data were extracted: the country where the study was conducted, the study design (i.e., retrospective or prospective), the sex distribution of the sample, the mean and standard deviation of the age of the participants, the number of participants enrolled in the study, the number of participants at the last follow-up, the diagnosis of the condition that led to surgical intervention, the name of the surgical procedure, the sleeprelated variable assessed (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, sleep quality, diagnosis of insomnia), the measurement instrument used to assess the sleep-related variable, the timing of the assessment of the sleep-related variable (i.e., preoperative or perioperative), the outcome variable (i.e., pain intensity, presence of pain or opioid use), the measurement instrument used to assess the outcome, the last follow-up available, the results at the last follow-up available. If the study was reported as an abstract in conference proceedings, the authors of the abstract were contacted and asked for the study data set or, if available, the coef /uniFB01 cient describing the association between the sleep variable and postsurgical pain in the original analysis or, if unavailable, the results of a Pearson product e moment correlation between the sleep variable and postsurgical pain. Inconsistencies were resolved by consensus.

Risk of bias

The risk of bias assessment of the included studies was performed independently by two reviewers using the Quality In Prognosis Studies (QUIPS) tool [40]. This instrument was chosen because it was speci /uniFB01 cally developed to assess the risk of bias in studies focusing on health-related predictors. The QUIPS covers six domains: 1) study participation, 2) study attrition, 3) prognostic factor measurement, 4) outcome measurement, 5) study

confounding, and 6) statistical analysis and reporting. Each domain is composed of subitems, that are combined to formulate an overall rating for each domain. As suggested by Grooten et al. [41], before the use of QUIPS, the reviewers discussed the interpretation of each of the sub-items, the operational rules to be used to rate them, and the weight to be given to each of them to formulate the overall rating of the domain. This process was supervised by a third reviewer. The reviewers then provided a comment re /uniFB02 ecting the results of this discussion for each subitem. The QUIPS and comments are reported in the supplementary materials (Supplementary materials, Table S2). The risk of bias was rated as low, moderate, or high for each domain. In the case of discrepancies between the two reviewers, the con /uniFB02 icts were resolved by consensus under the supervision of the third reviewer.

The results of the risk of bias assessment were used to describe the quality of the included studies in the narrative synthesis. These results were also converted into a numerical format to create a quality indicator for the studies that would be included as a /uniFB01 xed effect in the meta-regression (see the section Quantitative synthesis). For each domain, a grade of 2, 1 or 0 was assigned when there was, respectively, a low, moderate or high risk of bias. The quality indicator of the studies was calculated as the sum of the grades of the six domains.

## Narrative synthesis

First, a narrative synthesis of the results of all included studies was performed to assess the consistency of the association between preoperative and perioperative sleep disturbances, sleep disorders, and CPSP, also considering the methodological quality of the studies. The narrative synthesis also provides a preliminary evaluation of studies that were not subsequently included in the quantitative synthesis.

## Quantitative synthesis

According to our protocol, multiple meta-analyses were planned to analyse sleep-related variables measured in the preoperative period separately from those measured in the perioperative period and outcomes related to CPSP separately from outcomes related to opioid use. For this synthesis, only studies that provided the coef /uniFB01 cients representing the association between sleep-related variables and CPSP or opioid use and studies whose authors provided these coef /uniFB01 cients were considered. Since no study analysed the impact of perioperative sleep-related variables on CPSP or opioid use, and only one study analysed the impact of preoperative sleeprelated variables on opioid use, a single random-effect meta-analysis assessing the impact of preoperative sleep disturbance on CPSP was performed.

To perform the meta-analysis, all coef /uniFB01 cients and effect sizes extracted from the original studies, calculated using the available original data sets of the included studies, or provided by the authors of the studies, were /uniFB01 rst converted to Pearson's r using standard formulae and then converted to Fisher's z to be pooled [42,43]. The result of each meta-analysis was /uniFB01 nally backtransformed to Pearson's r for a more immediate interpretation. Estimates from bivariate analyses (e.g., Pearson's r, coef /uniFB01 cients of bivariate linear regressions) were included in the analysis when both bivariate and multivariable analyses were present. According to the protocol, data from different time points, subscales (e.g., the subscales of the Pittsburgh sleep quality index), outcome measurement instruments (e.g., Visual analogue scale, Numerical rating scale) or subgroups (e.g., primary knee arthroplasty and revision knee arthroplasty) within a single study, if comparable, were aggregated using standard formulae [42].

The presence of publication bias was investigated by a visual analysis of a funnel plot. In addition, the trim-and/uniFB01 ll method was used as a sensitivity analysis. This procedure provides an estimate of the number of missing studies due to publication bias and the effect that these studies might have on the overall effect.

The presence of heterogeneity was evaluated based on Cochran's Q, and the amount of heterogeneity was assessed using the I 2 index. The index can be interpreted as the percentage of the variability in effect estimates that is due to heterogeneity rather than sampling error. Values of 25%, 50%, and 75% were used as cut-off points for low, medium, and high inconsistency. As per protocol, separate subgroup analyses grouping studies based on type of outcome, type of predictor, and type of surgery were performed. Based on available data, the following three subgroups were created: 1) studies that considered continuous outcomes (e.g., Numeric rating scale scores) vs. studies that considered dichotomous outcomes (e.g., Numeric rating scale scores &gt; 3); 2) studies that evaluated the predictive value of variables related to sleep disturbance vs. studies that evaluated the predictive value of the presence of insomnia; 3) studies that included samples of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA) vs. total hip arthroplasty (THA) vs. breast surgery vs. other surgical procedures.

A meta-regression was then performed to determine other potential sources of heterogeneity. The variables included in the meta-regression model were: 1) sex composition of the sample, 2) the mean age of the sample, 3) methodological quality, and 4) the follow-up timing of the coef /uniFB01 cient included in the meta-analysis. The a level was set at 0.05. The analyses were performed using the R (version 4.0.3) package metafor [44].

Assessment of the certainty of the evidence

An overall assessment of the certainty of the evidence on the association between preoperative sleep disturbances, sleep disorders and CPSP was performed according to the GRADE guidelines for the evaluation of evidence on prognostic factors [45]. The GRADE system classi /uniFB01 es the certainty of evidence into one of four levels, namely: high, moderate, low, and very low. The certainty of evidence begins as high and is rated down for each concern in one of the following domains: risk of bias, inconsistency, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias. To perform this procedure, both the results of the narrative and quantitative synthesis were considered.

## Results

The /uniFB01 rst database, following the removal of duplicates, was composed of 6262 records. After the abstract and full text screening, 21 articles or abstracts of conference proceedings, corresponding to 18 studies (n ¼ 8408), were included in the systematic review. Table S3 (Supplementary materials) reports the studies that appeared to meet the inclusion criteria but were later excluded, with reasons for their exclusion. Fig. 1 shows the /uniFB02 ow diagram summarizing the study selection process.

Table 1 reports the description of the included studies. Among them, four were published in the form of abstracts of conference proceedings and 14 were published in the form of journal articles. Sixteen studies were prospective, while two were retrospective. The samples consisted predominantly of women (mean female percentage: 68%), and middle-aged participants (mean age: 60.7). The median sample size was 159. The most common surgical procedure was total knee arthroplasty (TKA; seven studies), followed by breast surgery (three studies), total hip arthroplasty (THA; two studies), thoracotomy (two studies), hip surgery (one study),

Fig. 1. Flow diagram of the systematic review.

<!-- image -->

Table 1

Characteristics of included studies.

| 6 Preoperative pain, age, sex, ASA score, catastrophizing, anxiety, depression, fatigue, participation in social roles, functional expectation, pain expectation Preoperative sleep quality predicted presence of pain in the period from three to six months after surgery in a model including all the confounders. In a second analysis employing a   | stepwise selection method, sleep quality was kept in the /uniFB01 nal model. Anxiety, depression, physical role function, fatigue, post-traumatic stress disorder, catastrophizing, psychological acceptance, pain threshold to cold, pain magnitude to supra- threshold cold Sleep disturbance was not associated with persistent pain after thoracic surgery in a multivariable model which included all the confounders. Age, BMI, catastrophizing, baseline pain intensity Preoperative sleep quality before surgery predicted pain intensity scores in both a bivariate model and in a multivariable model including the confounders. Depression was not associated with sleep quality and was not included in the regression models. Preoperative sleep quality was correlated with pain intensity at the follow-up in a bivariate analysis. Sleep quality was not correlated with pain intensity in a bivariate analysis (data provided by   | stepwise selection method, sleep quality was kept in the /uniFB01 nal model. Anxiety, depression, physical role function, fatigue, post-traumatic stress disorder, catastrophizing, psychological acceptance, pain threshold to cold, pain magnitude to supra- threshold cold Sleep disturbance was not associated with persistent pain after thoracic surgery in a multivariable model which included all the confounders. Age, BMI, catastrophizing, baseline pain intensity Preoperative sleep quality before surgery predicted pain intensity scores in both a bivariate model and in a multivariable model including the confounders. Depression was not associated with sleep quality and was not included in the regression models. Preoperative sleep quality was correlated with pain intensity at the follow-up in a bivariate analysis. Sleep quality was not correlated with pain intensity in a bivariate analysis (data provided by   | stepwise selection method, sleep quality was kept in the /uniFB01 nal model. Anxiety, depression, physical role function, fatigue, post-traumatic stress disorder, catastrophizing, psychological acceptance, pain threshold to cold, pain magnitude to supra- threshold cold Sleep disturbance was not associated with persistent pain after thoracic surgery in a multivariable model which included all the confounders. Age, BMI, catastrophizing, baseline pain intensity Preoperative sleep quality before surgery predicted pain intensity scores in both a bivariate model and in a multivariable model including the confounders. Depression was not associated with sleep quality and was not included in the regression models. Preoperative sleep quality was correlated with pain intensity at the follow-up in a bivariate analysis. Sleep quality was not correlated with pain intensity in a bivariate analysis (data provided by   | stepwise selection method, sleep quality was kept in the /uniFB01 nal model. Anxiety, depression, physical role function, fatigue, post-traumatic stress disorder, catastrophizing, psychological acceptance, pain threshold to cold, pain magnitude to supra- threshold cold Sleep disturbance was not associated with persistent pain after thoracic surgery in a multivariable model which included all the confounders. Age, BMI, catastrophizing, baseline pain intensity Preoperative sleep quality before surgery predicted pain intensity scores in both a bivariate model and in a multivariable model including the confounders. Depression was not associated with sleep quality and was not included in the regression models. Preoperative sleep quality was correlated with pain intensity at the follow-up in a bivariate analysis. Sleep quality was not correlated with pain intensity in a bivariate analysis (data provided by   | Anxiety, depression   | Sex, age, preoperative pain, fatigue, depression   | severe pain in a multiple logistic regression model. Baseline pain intensity, perceived stress, somatization, neuroticism, and the magni /uniFB01 cation subscale of the pain catastrophizing scale Sleep disturbance was included in a multiple robust linear model along with baseline pain intensity, stress, somatization, neuroticism and the magni the Pain Catastrophizing Scale. Depression was not associated with pain intensity and was not included in the In the   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 12                    | 12                                                 | 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| NRS /C21 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | NRS &gt; 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | BPI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | VAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | VAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | VAS                   | BPI /C21 4                                         | BPI-PS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Presence of pain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Presence of pain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Pain intensity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Pain intensity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Pain intensity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Pain intensity        | Presence of pain                                   | Pain intensity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| PROMIS-29                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | n/a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | PSQI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | VAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | PSQI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                       |                                                    | PROMIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Sleep quality                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Sleep disturbance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Sleep disturbance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Sleep quality                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | PSQI                  | PSQI                                               | Sleep disturbance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Sleep quality                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Sleep quality         | Sleep quality                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Any type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Thoracotomy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | THA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | THA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | TKA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Rotator cuff repair   | TKA                                                | TKA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 97 n/a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 99 n/a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Hip OA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | OA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | OA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Rotator cuff tear     | Knee OA                                            | OA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| 167                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 107                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 52 52                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 96 86                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 34 23                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 58 47                 | 202 187                                            | 64 (8.8) 153 153                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| 56 59 (14)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | n/a n/a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 59.6 70.4 (8.3)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 67 61.8 (12.8)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 61.8 65.4 (9.2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 57 57 (8)             | 66 68 (9)                                          | USA 58                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Belgium Prospective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | USA Prospective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Sweden Prospective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Canada Prospective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | USA Prospective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Korea Prospective     | Prospective                                        | Prospective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 2019 [60]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                       |                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                       | Norway                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | €                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Chen et al., 2016 [54]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Cho et al., 2015 [57] |                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Baeyens et al.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Bayman et al., 2017 [63]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Bjurstrom et al., 2021 [47]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Bogoch et al., 2010 [49]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                       | Getachew et al., 2021 [64]                         | Greco et al., 2017 [50]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

)

continued

(

Table 1

surgery

| of sleep disturbance was not signi /uniFB01 cant. 12 Age, BMI, axillary operation type, preoperative pain, previous chronic pain, smoking, depression, menopausal symptoms In the bivariate analysis, insomnia was associated to pain. In the multivariable model, the association between insomnia and pain decreased, but remained   | signi 6 Sleep disturbance was associated with persistent pain, the analysis type and how confounders were controlled for are not   | 12 Sleep disturbance was not associated with severe pain   | 3 Preoperative sleep quality was not correlated with postoperative pain in   | In a bivariate analysis, patients with higher   | six assessment sessions. A /uniFB01 rst analysis included socioeconomic status and active duty status as confounders. A second multivariable model included the following variables: sex, preoperative use of prescription opioids, high health-seeking behaviours, substance abuse, non-opioid pain medication prescription, mental health disorder diagnosis Having a diagnosis of insomnia before surgery predicted having three or more opioid prescriptions in the period from surgery to the 24th mo in both analyses but did not predict taking opioids one year after surgery in both analyses. Postoperative hip infection, service branch, socioeconomic status, preoperative post-traumatic stress disorder, metabolic disorder, mental health disorder, cardiac disorder, substance abuse, chronic pain   | Having a pre-operative diagnosis of insomnia predicted having three or more opioid prescriptions from surgery to the 24th month, but did not predict being in the upper median of the total days' supply of opioids and still taking opioids at one year after   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                    |                                                            |                                                                              | 6                                               | 24                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | opioids' prescriptions from surgery to the 24th month, still receiving prescriptions at one year or greater, being in the upper median of the total days' supply of opioids Archival data 24                                                                     |
| NRS /C21 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | n/a                                                                                                                                | BPI                                                        | VAS                                                                          | BSQ                                             | Archival data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Presence of pain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Presence of pain                                                                                                                   | Average pain intensity                                     | Pain intensity                                                               | Presence of pain                                | Having three or more opioids' prescriptions from surgery to the 24th month, still receiving prescriptions at one year or greater                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Having three or more                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Non- validated item                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | n/a                                                                                                                                | PSQI                                                       | PSQI                                                                         | GSDS                                            | Medical records                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Medical records                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Presence of insomnia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Sleep disturbance                                                                                                                  | Sleep disturbance                                          | Sleep quality                                                                | Sleep disturbance                               | Diagnosis of insomnia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Diagnosis of insomnia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Breast Surgery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Thoracotomy                                                                                                                        | TKA                                                        | TKA THA                                                                      | Breast cancer surgery                           | Hip Surgery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Hip Surgery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Breast Cancer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | n/a                                                                                                                                | OA                                                         | TKA: OA THA: OA                                                              | Breast Cancer                                   | FAI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | FAI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| 689 689                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | n/a 37 37                                                                                                                          | 100 79                                                     | TKA: 471 THA: 523                                                            | 398                                             | 1642                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 1870                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 57.4 (9.4)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                    | 63 (8)                                                     | THA: THA: 54.85 TKA: 64.28 (9.68) TKA: 471 THA: 523                          | 54.5 (11.1) 410                                 | 32.5 (8.2) 1642                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 32.2 (8.1) 1870                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Retrospective 100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Prospective n/a                                                                                                                    | Prospective 95                                             | Prospective TKA: 75.8                                                        | Prospective 100                                 | Retrospective 45.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Retrospective 44.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Finland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | USA                                                                                                                                | Russia                                                     | China                                                                        | USA                                             | USA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | USA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Gren et al., 2018 /C19 [59]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Hastie et al., 2013                                                                                                                | Kornilov et al.,                                           |                                                                              |                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | [62]                                                                                                                               | 2018 [52]                                                  |                                                                              |                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                    |                                                            |                                                                              |                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Rhon et al, 2019 [65]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                    |                                                            |                                                                              |                                                 | [66]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                    |                                                            | Luo et al., 2019 [53]                                                        | 2012 [61]                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                    |                                                            |                                                                              |                                                 | Rhon et al., 2018                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                    |                                                            |                                                                              | Miaskowki et al.,                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

7

| Schreiber et al., 2016a [55], 2016b [56], 2021 [46] n/a   | Prospective   | 100 55.5                     | 259          | Breast cancer   | Breast cancer surgery   | Sleep disturbance PROMIS-SF   | Pain intensity, pain frequence and severity   | BPI, Breast Cancer Pain Questionnaire   |   12 | Age, BMI, education status, alcohol use, total exercise, bilateral surgery, surgical procedure, previous breast surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, opioid use, severity of other chronic pain, Brief Symptom Inventory scores, coping strategies, affective state, catastrophizing, anxiety, depression, quantitative sensory testing results, preoperative pain intensity   | Preoperative sleep disturbance was an independent predictor of pain severity and pain impact after mastectomy in a bivariate analysis and remained signi /uniFB01 cant in a LASSO regression which included all the confounding variables.   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|------------------------------|--------------|-----------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Shim et al., 2018 [48] UK                                 | Prospective   | 52.6 Median: 68.6 (IQR 11.3) | 972          | OA              | TKA Sleep disturbance   | Sleep problems scale          | Pain intensity                                | Chronic Pain Grade                      |   12 | and pain functional impact                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Preoperative sleep disturbance was signi /uniFB01 cantly correlated with pain intensity at the follow- up in a bivariate analysis (data provided by the authors). Sleep disturbance was signi /uniFB01                                       |
| Soni et al., 2020 [51] UK                                 | Prospective   | 52                           | Median:70 96 | OA              | TKA Sleep disturbance   | PSQI                          | Pain intensity                                | NSR                                     |   12 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | cantly correlated with pain intensity at the follow- up (data provided by the authors). After controlling for the                                                                                                                            |
| Walker et al., 2015 [58] USA                              | Prospective   | 60 66.21 (8.28)              | 159          | n/a             | TKA Sleep duration      | n/a                           | Pain intensity                                | BPI                                     |   12 | Age, depression, preoperative pain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | confounders, preoperative sleep duration was a predictor of pain intensity at three months and 12                                                                                                                                            |

Notes. The records whose /uniFB01 rst author and year are Rhon et al., 2018 and Rhon et al., 2019 were considered as presenting a single study since their samples and aims largely overlap. Nonetheless, the data from these records are presented separately they include different analyses. The records whose /uniFB01 rst author and year are Schreiber 2016a, Schreiber 2016b and Schreiber 2021 are presented in the same line since they employed the same sample and the /uniFB01 rst two records are abstracts of conference proceedings presenting ad interim results.

Abbreviations: n/a: not available; THA: Total hip arthroplasty; VAS: Visual analogue scale; OA: Osteoarthritis; PSQI: Pittsburgh sleep quality index; BPI: Brief pain inventory; BPI-PS: Brief pain inventory - pain severity scale; NRS: Numeric rating scale; TKA: Total knee arthroplasty; BSQ: Breast symptoms questionnaire; FAI: Femoroacetabular impingement syndrome; PROMIS-29: Performance of the patient-reported outcomes measurement information system 29; PROMIS-SF: Patient-reported outcomes measurement information system-short form; PROMIS-29: Patient-reported outcome measurement information system- 29; GSDS: General sleep disturbance scale; PROMIS: Patient reported outcomes measurement information system; QUIPS: Quality in prognostic studies tool.

rotator cuff repair (one study), any type of surgery (one study), and one remaining study reported results for both TKA and THA. The duration of follow-up ranged from three months to 12 months, with a mode and a median of 12 months.

The most common diagnosis was osteoarthritis (OA; nine studies), followed by breast cancer (three studies), femoroacetabular impingement syndrome (one study) and rotator cuff tear (one study). The diagnosis was unclear for four studies, reported as abstracts of conference proceedings.

The included studies assessed only self-reported sleep disturbances, sleep duration and medical diagnosis of insomnia as predictors of CPSP or opioid use. Sleep disturbances were evaluated using validated questionnaires (i.e., Pittsburgh sleep quality index, Visual analogue scale, PROMIS Pro /uniFB01 le-29 e Sleep problems subscale, PROMIS short form e Sleep disturbance subscale, and General sleep disturbance scale) or, in one study, using a single ad hoc question.

The outcomes of the included studies were pain intensity (11 studies), presence of pain (six studies), and chronic opioid use (one study). Pain intensity was assessed using the pain severity subscale of the Brief pain inventory (four studies), Visual analogue scales (four studies), numerical rating scale (one study), and the Chronic pain grade (one study). In one study pain intensity was assessed using both Brief pain inventory and Breast cancer pain questionnaire. The instrument used to measure pain intensity was not reported in one abstract. The presence of pain was assessed as having a pain intensity /C21 3 (one study), /C21 4 (one study) or &gt; 5 (one study) measured using a Numeric rating scale, or /C21 4 as measured by the pain severity subscale of the Brief pain inventory (one study). In one study that used Breast symptoms questionnaire for assessing the presence of CPSP was not speci /uniFB01 ed if any cut-off was used, and another study did not specify how the presence of pain was evaluated. Chronic opioid use was de /uniFB01 ned as the presence of more than three prescriptions of opioids after the initial perioperative prescription or still receiving new opioids ' prescriptions after one year from surgery (one study).

## Methodological quality

The quality of the studies included in this review was variable. Fig. 2 represents the results of the risk of bias assessment for each study. Three studies were rated as having a low risk of bias in all QUIPS domains, and one study was rated as having a high risk of bias in all QUIPS domains. A low risk of bias was detected in more than half of the studies in the following QUIPS domains: study attrition (61.1%), prognostic factor measurement (66.7%), outcome measurement (94.4%) and study confounding (55.6%). On the other hand, only 33.3% of the studies were rated as having a low risk of bias in the study participation domain and 50.0% in the statistical analysis and reporting domain.

## Narrative synthesis

Table 1 reports the syntheses of the results of the studies and the confounders that were controlled for when assessing the association between sleep disturbances and sleep disorders in multivariable models, if any. A spreadsheet including the data reported in Table 1 is provided in the Supplementary Materials and can be used to /uniFB01 lter the studies and their results based on their characteristics.

## CPSP pain intensity

The association between sleep disturbances and CPSP intensity in bivariate analysis resulted signi /uniFB01 cant in six prospective studies, three with high methodological quality [46 e 48], two of moderate methodological quality [49,50] and one of low methodological quality [51]. In contrast, this association was found to be not signi /uniFB01 cant in two studies of high methodological quality [52,53] and one study with low methodological quality [54].

When this association was assessed in multivariable analyses, the results varied. Two prospective studies conducted bivariate and multivariable analyses and found a statistically signi /uniFB01 cant association between sleep disturbance and pain intensity at six months, controlling for age, BMI, and baseline pain severity [47], and at 12 months, in a multivariable prediction model which included demographic, clinical, pain-related, and psychological variables, including depression [46,55,56]. Both studies have high methodological quality. A prospective study with moderate methodological quality found statistically signi /uniFB01 cant associations between sleep disturbance and pain severity at 6 months, controlling for perceived stress, somatization, neuroticism, and the magni /uniFB01 cation subscale of the pain catastrophizing scale [50]. One low-quality study did not /uniFB01 nd a signi /uniFB01 cant association between sleep quality and pain intensity, controlling several confounders including anxiety and depression [57].

A prospective study found a statistically signi /uniFB01 cant association between self-reported sleep duration and pain intensity at 3 and 12 months, but not at 6 months, after controlling for age, depression, and preoperative pain; in this study, the methodological quality was low [58]. This was the only study to evaluate self-reported sleep duration, although it was not speci /uniFB01 ed how this factor was assessed.

## Presence of CPSP

Next, the results of studies that evaluated the role of sleep disturbances and disorders on the presence of CPSP are presented. Three prospective and one retrospective studies (one of high methodological quality, two of moderate methodological quality, and one of low methodological quality) found statistically signi /uniFB01 -cant associations between the preoperative presence of insomnia [59], sleep quality [60], sleep disturbance [61,62] and the presence of pain at follow-up in bivariate analyses. These effects were present also after controlling for preoperative pain-related, demographic, clinical, and psychological confounders, including depression [59,60]. In contrast, one study of high methodological quality and one study with low methodological quality found no associations in multivariable models between sleep disturbance and the presence of pain at three months in patients undergoing thoracotomy [63], controlling for anxiety, depression, physical role function, fatigue, post-traumatic stress disorder, catastrophizing, psychological acceptance, pain threshold to cold, pain magnitude to supra-threshold cold, and at 12 months in patients undergoing TKA [64], controlling for sex, age, preoperative pain intensity, fatigue, and depression.

## Opioid use

Regarding opioid use, a single retrospective study of high quality found that the diagnosis of medical insomnia before surgery predicted having three or more opioid prescriptions from surgery to the 24th mo after surgery after controlling for multiple confounders in patients undergoing hip surgery (i.e., postsurgical hip infection, service branch, socioeconomic status, preoperative post-traumatic stress disorder, metabolic disorder, mental health disorder, cardiac disorder, substance abuse, and chronic pain) [65,66].

Fig. 2. Methodological quality of the included studies according to the QUIPS tool.

<!-- image -->

## Meta-analysis

It was possible to extract or retrieve the coef /uniFB01 cients representing the association between preoperative sleep variables and CPSP from 12 studies. One of these coef /uniFB01 cients was calculated based on the originaldatasetobtainedfromthestudyauthors[54],fourcoef /uniFB01 cients were provided by the study authors upon request [48,51,52,59]. One article reported separate results for a cohort of patients undergoing TKA and a cohort of patients undergoing THA, therefore the coef /uniFB01 cients of the two cohorts were included in the analyses separately [53]. All these coef /uniFB01 cients were included in a meta-analysis.

This meta-analysis detected a signi /uniFB01 cant weak effect of sleep disturbances and disorders on CPSP, with an estimate of r ¼ 0.13 (95% CI 0.06 e 0.20; p &lt; .01) (Fig. 3). Heterogeneity among the studies was moderate (I 2 66.81%; Q (12) ¼ 38.78, p &lt; .01). Visual inspection of the funnel plot revealed a slight asymmetry in the left part of the plot, possibly due to publication bias (Fig. 4). However, the trim-and/uniFB01 ll procedure showed that the inclusion of two potential missing studies would have only slightly reduced the overall estimate, which would have retained its signi /uniFB01 cance (r ¼ 0.10, 95% CI 0.04 e 0.17, p &lt; .01).

## Subgroup analysis and meta-regression

Table 2 shows the coef /uniFB01 cients resulting from the subgroup analyses. Forest plots resulting from this analysis are reported in the Supplementary materials (Figs. S-1 e S-3). The coef /uniFB01 cients of the subgroups created based on the use of a dichotomous outcome (i.e., the presence of CPSP) or a continuous outcome (i.e., pain intensity at follow-up) were of similar size, but the coef /uniFB01 cient relative to studies

Although study quality was not signi /uniFB01 cantly associated with the overall estimate in the meta-regression, we judged that there was a potential impact of the risk of bias on the results of the meta-analysis since most of the included studies had at least one moderate risk in the domain of the QUIPS. The results suffered from inconsistency due to the presence of heterogeneity. Since all studies assessed the impact of a sleep variable on CPSP, the

<!-- image -->

Correlation Coefficient

assessing dichotomous outcomes was not signi /uniFB01 cant. The subgroup analysis based on the type of sleep-related variables was in /uniFB02 uenced by the imbalance in the number of studies for each subgroup, as 12 coef /uniFB01 cients referred to sleep disturbance and only one coef /uniFB01 cient to the presence of insomnia. The coef /uniFB01 cient relative to the presence of insomnia was higher than the coef /uniFB01 cient relative to sleep disturbance. The subgroup analysis performed based on the type of surgery was in /uniFB02 uenced by the fact that the subgroups were small. The coef /uniFB01 cient of the subgroup of studies assessing patients that had TKA was signi /uniFB01 cant and similar to the overall coef /uniFB01 cient. The coef /uniFB01 cients of the studies investigating samples of patients that had breast surgery or THA were not signi /uniFB01 cant and had a very wide con /uniFB01 dence interval. Finally, the subgroup that included studies of patients that had other surgery types (e.g., rotator cuff repair, mixed surgeries) had a small but signi /uniFB01 cant coef /uniFB01 cient.

The results of the meta-regression are reported in Table 3. Follow-up duration was the only /uniFB01 xed effect that showed a positive association with the overall effect. The inclusion of all /uniFB01 xed effects in the model reduced I 2 to 0% (test for residual heterogeneity Q (8) ¼ 8.53, p ¼ .38).

## Assessment of the certainty of the evidence

Fig. 4. Funnel plot for the meta-analysis on the association between preoperative sleep disturbances and chronic postsurgical pain.

<!-- image -->

Table 2 Results of the subgroup analyses.

| Subgroup               | Number of estimates   | Overall estimate (95% con /uniFB01 dence interval)   |
|------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Outcome type           |                       |                                                      |
| Continuous             | 10                    | 0.13 (0.03 e 0.23) *                                 |
| Dichotomous            | 3                     | 0.15 ( /C0 0.01 e 0.31)                              |
| Sleep-related variable |                       |                                                      |
| Sleep disturbance      | 12                    | 0.12 (0.04 e 0.20) *                                 |
| Insomnia               | 1                     | 0.19 (0.12 e 0.26) *                                 |
| Surgery type           |                       |                                                      |
| THA                    | 3                     | 0.19 ( /C0 0.41 e 0.78)                              |
| TKA                    | 6                     | 0.12 (0.01 e 0.23) *                                 |
| Breast surgery         | 2                     | 0.15 ( /C0 0.37 e 0.68)                              |
| Other                  | 2                     | 0.08 (0.00 e 0.16) *                                 |

Notes. * p &lt; .05.

results of the meta-analysis were considered as not being affected by indirectness. The imprecision was not signi /uniFB01 cant since the con /uniFB01 dence intervals of the coef /uniFB01 cient of the metaanalysis were not extended to thresholds of no effect or of medium effect. Although a slight left asymmetry in the funnel plot suggested that the presence of missing studies might have in /uniFB02 uenced the overall effect, the trim-and/uniFB01 ll procedure showed that the impact of these missing studies on the overall estimate would be minor. Therefore, we decided not to rate down the certainty of evidence based on potential publication bias. Taking all these criteria into account, we judged the certainty of the evidence to be low.

## Discussion

This study aimed to review the growing area of sleep disturbances and sleep disorders as risk factors for the development of CPSP. To our knowledge, the current study is the /uniFB01 rst systematic review and meta-analysis on this topic.

One interesting /uniFB01 nding from our work is that all the studies evaluated sleep from a self-reported perspective. Only one study used a medical diagnosis of insomnia without specifying how the diagnosis was made (e.g., according to ICD vs ICSD) and none used polysomnography or actigraphy. Both self-reported and objective aspects are important and should be assessed because they

Table 3 Results of the meta-regression.

| Variable               | Overall estimate (95% con /uniFB01 dence interval)   |
|------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Intercept              | /C0 0.23 ( /C0 0.89 e 0.43)                          |
| Female %               | 0.00 ( /C0 0.01 e 0.01)                              |
| Age                    | 0.01 ( /C0 0.01 e 0.01)                              |
| Methodological quality | /C0 0.02 ( /C0 0.06 e 0.11)                          |
| Follow-up duration     | 0.02 (0.01 e 0.03) *                                 |

Note. * p &lt; .05.

measure different dimensions of sleep. Despite the con /uniFB02 icting evidence [67,68], the majority of studies suggest that objective and subjective measures of sleep are not necessarily associated [69 e 71]. Thus, more research combining objective measurements with self-reported measures (e.g., actigraphy, polysomnography) is needed to provide an accurate assessment of sleep architecture and to clarify the neurobiological mechanisms through which sleep in /uniFB02 uences postsurgical pain.

Results of meta-analysis showed that preoperative sleep disturbances and sleep disorders are signi /uniFB01 cant predictors of CPSP. However, as with the other genetic, demographic, clinical, surgeryrelated, and psychological risk factors studied thus far [10,11,72,73] the overall effect size was small. This suggests that sleep disturbances and disorders add up to a multiplicity of predictors, each of which accounts for a small part of the variance in pain intensity and the presence of pain at follow-up.

Duetothe presence of risk of bias in most of the studies included in the review and the heterogeneity between the different estimates, the con /uniFB01 dence in the estimate was low. Risk of bias was present in the participation, analysis, and reporting domains of the QUIPS. The presence of bias in the analysis and reporting domains can be explained by the fact that many abstracts from recent conference proceedings were included, suggesting that this study /uniFB01 eld is beginning to attract interest from researchers. The presence of bias in the participation domain, on the other hand, suggests that future studies should include large and representative samples to enhance the con /uniFB01 dence in the association between sleep disturbances, sleep disorders and chronic postsurgical pain. Regarding heterogeneity, the meta-regression showed that studies with longer follow-up found higher associations between sleep disturbances, sleep disorders and chronic postsurgical pain. Future research should evaluate the possibility that sleep disturbances and disorders have an impact on CPSP pain that increases over time.

Importantly, our results are consistent with those of systematic reviews and meta-analyses conducted on chronic pain conditions. For example, evidence suggests that sleep disturbances are a risk factor for back pain [74], persistent spinal pain [75], and that poor sleep quality negatively affects pain-related health outcomes [31]. Regarding postsurgical pain, evidence reported that improved perioperative sleep could reduce acute postsurgical pain after TKA and THA [76]. In both a recent systematic review with metaanalysis [34,77] and a qualitative systematic review [78], preoperative sleep dif /uniFB01 culties were found to be a prognostic factor for poor acute postsurgical pain control [34,78].

Evidence suggests that sleep disturbances and disorders affect pain via mediators such as impaired immunity, elevated in /uniFB02 ammatory responses, and elevated levels of cytokines (i.e., interleukin6, C-reactive protein, and cortisol) that have a pain facilitatory effect and can alter pain modulation processing [79 e 81]. High levels of these markers have been reported in several chronic diseases and contribute to the onset and maintenance of chronic pain conditions [82,83]. The endogenous opioid system is involved in the regulation of pain experience [84] and could be another potential mechanism by which sleep could have a direct impact on pain [85]. In fact, preliminary evidence shows that sleep deprivation can alter endogenous opioid function. These /uniFB01 ndings suggest that sleep disruption appears to have a deactivating effect on systems with analgesic properties, and an activating effect on systems with hyperalgesic properties [86].

Interestingly, mood is another possible mediator of the association between sleep and pain. Indeed, sleep quality predicts nextday mood [87,88], and negative mood increases self-reported pain, decreases pain tolerance [89], and alters pain responses [90]. Depression, for example, was found to account for a signi /uniFB01 cant portion of the variance in the relationship between sleep and pain in adults with heterogeneous chronic pain conditions [91]. Other evidence suggests that sleep disturbances impact pain interference through negative affect (i.e., the extent to which a person experiences subjective distress, unpleasant engagement, and emotional pain [92]) in adults and older patients [93], as well as in children with sickle cell disease [94] and chronic pain [95].

In this review, ten studies assessed preoperative depression. Unfortunately, because the multivariable models that included it were composed of heterogeneous sets of confounders and because it was measured with different instruments, it was not possible to account for the potential confounding effect of this factor in the meta-analysis or the meta-regression. Nonetheless, the results of the studies included in this review appear to indicate that accounting for the confounding effect of depression is not suf /uniFB01 cient to explain the association between sleep disturbances, sleep disorders, and CPSP or analgesic use. In fact, in the multivariable models that included depression, the association between sleep disturbances, sleep disorders, and CPSP or opioid use at follow-up was signi /uniFB01 cant in /uniFB01 ve studies [46,58 e 60,65,66] and non-signi /uniFB01 cant in three studies [57,63,64]. Whereas in two studies this factor was excluded from the multivariable models since it was not associated with pain intensity [47,50]. Although it is not possible to disentangle the effect of depression from the effects of the other variables included in these models, it can be argued that the mere inclusion of this factor does not account for the association between preoperative sleep and CPSP.

Several considerations must be made. A possible explanation for our results might be that patients with preoperative sleep disturbances or sleep disorders had a general worse health status, which could have in /uniFB02 uenced the occurrence of CPSP. However, according to our narrative synthesis, even controlling for confounding factors such as preoperative pain level and other health-related variables, the effect of sleep remains signi /uniFB01 cant. Furthermore, most of the studies included relied on the overall scores of self-reported measures of sleep disturbances. Although sleep is a complex phenomenon, this approach might not accurately capture speci /uniFB01 c components of the sleep experience. We recommend evaluating sleep latency, total sleep time, and sleep continuity in addition to overall perceived sleep quality.

It should be noted that there is a lack of studies that investigated the in /uniFB02 uence of preoperative sleep disturbances and disorders on the chronic use of opioids in the postsurgical period. Preliminary evidence in burn injury survivors indicates that poor sleep quality might be associated with increases on the next day in opioids doses ' [96]. This could also be an interesting area of research in CPSP. Indeed, reducing the prescriptions of opioids for postsurgical pain is compelling given their dramatic increase [97] and detrimental health consequences [98]. In addition, we emphasize that only one study distinguished between primary and secondary sleep disorders [65]. None of the other studies clari /uniFB01 ed whether sleep disturbances existed prior to the condition that led to surgery. Although this is beyond the scope of our study, it may be important in future research to take this distinction into account.

The studies included in this review used either the intensity of postsurgical pain or the probability of having pain above a certain threshold as outcomes. Although these outcomes can be used as proxies for the presence of CPSP, the medical diagnosis of this condition requires the presence of additional criteria, such as pain that affects the patient's quality of life, pain that is localised to the surgical area or projected into the innervation territories of the nerves located there, and no other explanatory cause [1]. This shortcoming is common to most reviews investigating predictors of postsurgical pain [10,11], and is due to the methodological choice of most original articles to measure only pain intensity, or the presence of pain intensity above a threshold, as an outcome. Because the original studies did not evaluate all the CPSP criteria, it is dif /uniFB01 cult to drawn precise conclusions about whether predictors actually in /uniFB02 uence CPSP. We suggest that future studies addressing predictors of CPSP should consider using the medical diagnosis of CPSP as an outcome.

This study broadens our knowledge about the relationship between sleep and pain. Routine screening for sleep disturbances and disorders in patients undergoing surgery should be prioritized. In addition to self-report questionnaires that assess sleep quality, screening could be done using wearable devices (e.g., actigraphy) that provide reliable home monitoring of several sleep parameters [99]. A multidisciplinary evaluation with both pain and sleep experts could be bene /uniFB01 cial in order to minimize CPSP. Early intervention at a preoperative level aimed at improving sleep quality and reducing sleep disorders might be a potential preventive strategy. Moreover, despite the low certainty of the evidence, our study may point in a promising direction for future research. For example, prospective studies on early treatment of preoperative sleep disturbances in patients undergoing surgeries should be conducted to investigate whether they can prevent the development of CPSP. This may provide evidence of the causal association between preoperative sleep and CPSP.

## Limitations

Due to the lack of a clear and consistent de /uniFB01 nition of sleep disturbance and sleep disorders across studies, researchers have used different questionnaires and cutoff scores to evaluate sleep, which may have captured different aspects of sleep. In fact, sleep is a multidimensional experience encompassing objective and subjective factors [100]. Indeed, it has been suggested that different aspects of sleep, such as sleep quality and sleep duration, have a speci /uniFB01 c effect on pain outcomes [31]. Therefore, it might be worthwhile to investigate the role of speci /uniFB01 c aspects of sleep in the presence of CPSP. In future research, a clear distinction should be made between sleep disturbances and sleep disorders because they may have differential effects on pain. Furthermore, there is a lack of evidence regarding the role of perioperative sleep on CPSP. Finally, the primary outcome of this study was pain intensity. Other important aspects of pain have a signi /uniFB01 cant impact on a patient's quality of life, such as pain interference. In future research, this aspect should be considered.

## Conclusion

This systematic review and meta-analysis showed that preoperative sleep disturbance (i.e., mostly re /uniFB02 ecting the poor-sleep quality/insomnia domain) negatively contributes to the development and intensity of CPSP. Early detection of sleep disturbances and sleep disorders in patients undergoing surgical intervention considered in this study could lead to more tailored interventions, better pain management, and reduced use of pain medications. Greater awareness of the importance of sleep could aid in the development of personalized preoperative care pathways. Patients undergoing surgery may bene /uniFB01 t from a multidisciplinary preoperative evaluation, as well as early preoperative sleep modi /uniFB01 cation, to help reduce the occurrence of postsurgical pain. However, generalization to surgical interventions different from those examined is not warranted.

## Practice point

- /C15 Preoperative sleep disturbances and sleep disorders are predictors of chronic postsurgical pain intensity.
- /C15 Patients should be screened prior to surgery to identify those who are at risk for sleep disturbances and sleep disorders.
- /C15 Incorporating sleep assessment into a multidisciplinary preoperative evaluation and improving preoperative sleep could help reduce the presence and intensity of chronic postsurgical pain.

## Research agenda

- /C15 Prospective studies of interventions aimed at reducing sleep disturbances and disorders preoperatively in patients undergoing surgery should be conducted to investigate whether early treatment of sleep disturbances and disorders can prevent the presence of chronic postsurgical pain.
- /C15 In addition to sleep disturbances, future studies should investigate the role of specific sleep disorders (e.g., insomnia, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome) in the development of chronic postsurgical pain.
- /C15 We recommend following established diagnostic criteria when diagnosing insomnia and other sleep disorders and indicating which set of criteria was used.
- /C15 More studies are needed to evaluate preoperative and perioperative sleep disturbances and disorders as risk factors for chronic use of opioids in the postsurgical period.
- /C15 There is a lack of evidence regarding the role of perioperative sleep disturbances and disorders on chronic postsurgical pain; future research should fill this gap.
- /C15 In future research, objective measures of sleep disturbances and disorders should be used alongside selfreported measures
- /C15 It could be important to evaluate in future research how mood disturbances (e.g., depression) and sleep interact and contribute to chronic postsurgical pain.

## Previous presentation

None.

## Disclaimer

None.

## Institution at which the work was performed

Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, Italy. /C18

## Disclosure of the /uniFB01 nancial support

None.

## Authors ' contributions

All authors contributed to the manuscript as follows:

GV conceived the study, designed the study, performed the electronic search, acquired data, performed the screening of the records and the data extraction, performed the analyses, interpreted the data, drafted the manuscript.

EMG designed the study, performed the electronic search, acquired data, performed the screening of the records, performed the analyses, interpreted the data, drafted the manuscript.

- CM performed the screening of the records and the data extraction, interpreted the data, drafted the manuscript.
- GC interpreted the data, revised content critically.
- FP interpreted the data, revised content critically.
- CF interpreted the data, revised content critically.
- GP interpreted the data, revised content critically.
- All authors have revised the content critically, have read and approved the /uniFB01 nal manuscript.

## Con /uniFB02 icts of interest

The authors have no con /uniFB02 icts of interests to declare, that may be affected by the publication of the paper. Other con /uniFB02 icts of interests are as follows: GP research is supported by Takeda, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Bioproject, Idorsia.

## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Doctors Antonia Chen, Nikolai Kornilov, Christine Parsons, Reetta Sipila, Essi Gren, Anushka Soni, Martin € /C19 Bjurstrom, Josephine Zachodnik and Marcus Beasley for their kind € willingness to provide us with data and information about their studies. Their contribution has been crucial in improving the accuracy of this review.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2022.101630.

## References

- [1] Werner MU, Kongsgaard UE. De /uniFB01 ning persistent post-surgical pain: is an update required? Br J Anaesth 2014;113(1):1 e 4.
- * [2] Kehlet H, Jensen TS, Woolf CJ. Persistent postsurgical pain: risk factors and prevention. Lancet 2006;367(9522):1618 e 25.
- [3] Richebe P, Capdevila X, Rivat C. Persistent postsurgical pain. Anesthesi/C19 ology 2018;129(3):590 e 607.
- [4] Correll D. Chronic postoperative pain: recent /uniFB01 ndings in understanding and management. F1000Research 2017;6:1054. 1054.
- [5] Steyaert A, Lavand homme P. Prevention and treatment of chronic post-' surgical pain: a narrative review. Drugs 2018 Mar;78(3):339 e 54.
- [6] Carley ME, Chaparro LE, Choiniere /C18 M, Kehlet H, Moore RA, Van Den Kerkhof E, et al. Pharmacotherapy for the prevention of chronic pain after surgery in adults: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesthesiology 2021;(7):304 e 25.
- [7] Theodoroff SM, McMillan GP, Zaugg TL, Cheslock M, Roberts C, Henry JA. Randomized controlled trial of a novel device for tinnitus sound therapy during sleep. Am J Audiol 2017 Dec;26(4):543 e 54.
- [8] van Reij RRI, Joosten EAJ, van den Hoogen NJ. Dopaminergic neurotransmission and genetic variation in chroni /uniFB01 cation of post-surgical pain. Br J Anaesth 2019 Dec;123(6):853 e 64.
- [9] Theunissen M, Peters ML, Bruce J, Gramke HF, Marcus MA. Preoperative anxiety and catastrophizing: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the association with chronic postsurgical pain. Clin J Pain 2012;28(9):819 e 41.
- [10] Giusti EM, Lacerenza M, Manzoni GM, Castelnuovo G. Psychological and psychosocial predictors of chronic postsurgical pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 2021 Jan;162(1):10 e 30.
- [11] Jackson T, Tian P, Wang Y, Iezzi T, Xie W. Toward identifying moderators of associations between presurgery emotional distress and postoperative pain outcomes: a meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. J Pain 2016;17(8): 874 e 88. 2016/05/11.
- [12] Giusti EM, Manna C, Varallo G, Cattivelli R, Manzoni GM, Gabrielli S, et al. The predictive role of executive functions and psychological factors on chronic pain after orthopaedic surgery : a longitudinal cohort study. Brain Sci 2020;10(10):1 e 10.
- [13] Lavand'Homme P, Thienpont E. Pain after total knee arthroplasty: a narrative review focusing on the strati /uniFB01 cation of patients at risk for persistent pain. Bone Jt J 2015;97-B(10):45 e 8.
- [14] Birgitte B, Lone N, Charlotte TH, Henrik Kehlet TSJ. Risk Factors for Chronic Pain after Hysterectomy: A nationwide questionnaire and database study. Anesthesiology 2007;106:1003 e 112.
- [15] Poleshuck EL, Katz J, Andrus CH, Hogan LA, Jung BF, Kulick DI, et al. Risk factors for chronic pain following breast cancer surgery: a prospective study. J Pain 2006;7(9):626 e 34.
- [16] Gerbershagen HJ, Dagtekin O, Rothe T, Heidenreich A, Gerbershagen K, Sabatowski R, et al. Risk factors for acute and chronic postoperative pain in patients with benign and malignant renal disease after nephrectomy. Eur J Pain 2009;13(8):853 e 60.
- [17] Aasvang E, Kehlet H. Chronic postoperative pain: the case of inguinal herniorrhaphy. Br J Anaesth 2005;95(1):69 e 76.
- [18] Roehrs T, Roth T. Sleep and pain: interaction of two vital functions. Semin Neurol 2005;25(1):106 e 16.
- [19] SaconiB,PolomanoRC,ComptonPC,McPhillipsMV,KunaST,SawyerAM.The in /uniFB02 uence of sleep disturbances and sleep disorders on pain outcomes among veterans: a systematic scoping review. Sleep Med Rev 2021;56:101411.
- [20] Husak AJ, Bair MJ. Chronic pain and sleep disturbances: a pragmatic review of their relationships, comorbidities, and treatments. Pain Med 2020;21(6):1142 e 52.
- [21] Krystal AD, Edinger JD. Measuring sleep quality. Sleep Med 2008;9(SUPPL. 1):10 e 7.
- [22] Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatr Res 1989;28:193 e 213.
- [23] American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International classi /uniFB01 cation of sleep disorders. 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2014.
- [24] World Health Organization. International classi /uniFB01 cation of diseases for mortality and morbidity statistics. 11th Revis; 2018.
- [25] Smith MT, Klick B, Kozachik S, Edwards RE, Holavanahalli R, Wiechman S, et al. Sleep onset insomnia symptoms during hospitalization for major burn injury predict chronic pain. Pain 2008;138(3):497 e 506.
- [26] Jansson-Frojmark € M, Boersma K. Bidirectionality between pain and insomnia symptoms: a prospective study. Br J Health Psychol 2012;17(2): 420 e 31.
- [27] Bigatti SM, Hernandez AM, Cronan TA, Rand KL. Sleep disturbances in /uniFB01 bromyalgia syndrome: relationship to pain and depression. Arthritis Care Res 2008;59(7):961 e 7.
- [28] Onen SH, Onen F, Courpron P, Dubray C. How pain and analgesics disturb sleep. Clin J Pain 2005;21(5):422 e 31.
- [29] Park SJ, Yoon DM, Yoon KB, Moon JA, Kim SH. Factors associated with higher reported pain levels in patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain: a cross-sectional, correlational analysis. PLoS One 2016;11(9):1 e 11.
- * [30] Finan PH, Goodin BR, Smith MT. The association of sleep and pain: an update and a path forward. J Pain 2013;14(12):1539 e 52.
- * [31] Afolalu EF, Ramlee F, Tang NKY. Effects of sleep changes on pain-related health outcomes in the general population: a systematic review of longitudinal studies with exploratory meta-analysis. Sleep Med Rev 2018;39: 82 e 97.
- * [32] Smith MT, Haythornthwaite JA. How do sleep disturbance and chronic pain inter-relate? Insights from the longitudinal and cognitive-behavioral clinical trials literature. Sleep Med Rev 2004;8(2):119 e 32.
- [33] Tang NKY, Goodchild CE, Sanborn AN, Howard J, Salkovskis PM. Deciphering the temporal link between pain and sleep in a heterogeneous chronic pain patient sample: a multilevel daily process study. Sleep 2012;35(5):675 e 87.
- * [34] Yang MMH, Hartley RL, Leung AA, Ronksley PE, Jette N, Casha S, et al. /C19 Preoperative predictors of poor acute postoperative pain control: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9(4).
- [35] Dolan R, Huh J, Tiwari N, Sproat T, Camilleri-Brennan J. A prospective analysis of sleep deprivation and disturbance in surgical patients. Ann Med Surg 2016;6:1 e 5.
- [36] Roehrs TA, Roth T. Increasing presurgery sleep reduces postsurgery pain and analgesic use following joint replacement: a feasibility study. Sleep Med 2017;33:109 e 13.

- * [37] Sipila RM. Sleep well and recover faster with less pain € d a narrative review on sleep in the perioperative period. 2021.
- [38] Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021 Mar;372:n71.

[39] Ouzzani M, Hammady H, Fedorowicz Z, Elmagarmid A. Rayyan d a web and mobile app for systematic reviews. Syst Rev 2016 Dec;5(1):210.

[40] Hayden JA, van der Windt DA, Cartwright JL, Cote ^ /C19 P, Bombardier C. Assessing bias in studies of prognostic factors. Ann Intern Med 2013 Feb;158(4):280.

- [41] Grooten WJA, Tseli E, Ang BO, Boersma K, Stålnacke B-M, Gerdle B, et al. € Elaborating on the assessment of the risk of bias in prognostic studies in pain rehabilitation using QUIPS d aspects of interrater agreement. Diagn Progn Res 2019;3(1):5.
- [42] Borenstein M, Hedges LV, Higgins JPT, Rothstein HR. Introduction to metaanalysis. 2009.
- [43] Peterson RA, Brown SP. On the use of beta coef /uniFB01 cients in meta-analysis. J Appl Psychol 2005 Jan;90(1):175 e 81.
- [44] Viechtbauer W. Conducting meta-analyses in {R} with the {metafor} package. J Stat Software 2010;36(3):1 e 48.
- [45] Foroutan F, Guyatt G, Zuk V, Vandvik PO, Alba AC, Mustafa R, et al. GRADE Guidelines 28: use of GRADE for the assessment of evidence about prognostic factors: rating certainty in identi /uniFB01 cation of groups of patients with different absolute risks. J Clin Epidemiol 2020;121:62 e 70.

[46] Schreiber KL, Zinboonyahgoon N, Flowers KM, Hruschak V, Fields KG, Patton ME, et al. Prediction of persistent pain severity and impact 12 Months after breast surgery using comprehensive preoperative assessment of biopsychosocial pain modulators. Ann Surg Oncol 2021;28(9): 5015 e 38.

- [47] Bjurstrom MF, Irwin MR, Bodelsson M, Smith MT, Mattsson-Carlgren N. € Preoperative sleep quality and adverse pain outcomes after total hip arthroplasty. Eur J Pain 2021;25(7):1482 e 92.
- [48] Shim J, Mclernon DJ, Hamilton D, Simpson HA, Beasley M, Macfarlane GJ. Development of a clinical risk score for pain and function following total knee arthroplasty: results from the TRIO study. Rheumatol Adv Pract 2018;2(2):1 e 9.
- [49] Bogoch ER, Olschewski E, Zangger P, Henke ML, Smythe HA. Increased tender point counts before and after total hip arthroplasty are associated with poorer outcomes but are not individually predictive. J Arthroplasty 2010;25(6):945 e 50.
- [50] Greco C, Belfer I, Vulakovich K, Landsittel D, Dai F, Chelly J. Associations of psychosocial factors with chronic postsurgical pain following total knee arthroplasty. J Pain 2017;18(4):S76.
- [51] Soni A, Bartling A, Wanigasekera V, Tracey I. Sleep disturbance is associated with more severe pain and worse outcome following knee replacement surgery in patients with knee osteoarthritis. Br J Pain 2020;14(1):8 e 9.
- [52] Kornilov N, Lindberg MF, Gay C, Saraev A, Kuliaba T, Rosseland LA, et al. Higher physical activity and lower pain levels before surgery predict nonimprovement of knee pain 1 y after TKA. Knee Surgery. Sport Traumatol Arthrosc 2018;26(6):1698 e 708.
- [53] Luo Z, Li L, Wang D, Wang H, Pei F, Zhou Z. Preoperative sleep quality affects postoperative pain and function after total joint arthroplasty : a prospective cohort study. J Orthop Surg Res 2019;14(1):1 e 10.
- [54] Chen AF, Orozco FR, Austin LS, Post ZD, Deirmengian CA, Ong AC. Prospective evaluation of sleep disturbances after total knee arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty 2016;31(1):330 e 2.
- [55] Schreiber KL, Zinboonyahgoon RRE N. Acute and subacute postoperative pain after partial and total mastectomy: prospective association with pyschophysical and psychosocial processing of pain. Anesth Analg 2016;122:S1 e 480.
- [56] Schreiber K, Zinboonyahgoon N, Cornelius M, Edwards R. Acute and subacute postoperative pain after partial and total mastectomy: association with prospectively assessed psychosocial and psychophysical variables. J Pain 2016;17(4):S37. 248.
- [57] Cho CH, Song KS, Hwang I, Warner JJP. Does rotator cuff repair improve psychologic status and quality of life in patients with rotator cuff tear? Clin Orthop Relat Res 2015;473(11):3494 e 500.
- [58] Walker J, Campbell C, Pejsa M, Hand M, Haythornthwaite J, Edwards R, et al. Pre- and post-operative sleep is associated with post-operative pain and functioning following total knee replacements. J Pain [Internet] 2015;16(4): S63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2015.01.268. Available from:.
- [59] Gren E, Sipila R, /C19 € Salo P. Does preoperative insomnia explain persistent pain after breast cancer treatments? J Sleep Res 2018;27:172 e 3.
- [60] Baeyens M, Neckebroek M, De Paepe A, De Bock L, Keunebrock L, Crombez G, et al. Screening for psychosocial variables that predict chronic postsurgical pain. In: European society of regional anesthesia; 2019. A234.1 e 234.
- [61] Miaskowski C, Cooper B, Paul SM, West C, Langford D, Levine JD, et al. Identi /uniFB01 cation of patient subgroups and risk factors for persistent breast pain following breast cancer surgery. J Pain 2012;13(12):1172 e 87.
- [62] Hastie B, Klodell C, Frye R, Wallace M. Tick-Tock.genes working round the clock: associations with sleep and acute and chronic post-thoracotomy pain. J Pain 2013;14(4):S33.
- [63] Bayman E, Brennan T. A prospective study of predictors of chronic pain after thoracic surgery. J Pain 2017;18(4):S75.

| [64]      | Getachew M, Lerdal A, Småstuen MC, Gay CL, Aamodt A, Tesfaye M, et al. High levels of preoperative pain and fatigue are red /uniFB02 ags for moderate-                                                                                                                                                               |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|           | cohort study. Muscoskel Care 2021;19(2):186 e 92. Rhon DI, Snodgrass SJ, Cleland JA, Cook CE. Comorbid insomnia and sleep apnea are associated with greater downstream health care utilization and chronic opioid use after arthroscopic hip surgery. Pain Physician                                                 |
| [65]      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| [66]      | 2019;22(4):E351 e 60. Rhon DI, Snodgrass SJ, Cleland JA, Sissel CD, Cook CE. Predictors of chronic prescription opioid use after orthopedic surgery : derivation of a clinical                                                                                                                                       |
| [67]      | prediction rule. Perioperat Med 2018:1 e 11. Vitiello MV, Larsen LH, Moe KE. Age-related sleep change: gender and                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| [68]      | estrogen effects on the subjective-objective sleep quality relationships of healthy, noncomplaining older men and women. J Psychosom Res 2004;56(5):503 e 10. McCrae CS, Rowe MA, Tierney CG, Dautovich ND, DeFinis AL,                                                                                              |
| [69]      | dwelling older adults. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2005;60(4):182 e 9. Jackson CL, Patel SR, Jackson WB, Lutsey PL, Redline S. Agreement be- tween self-reported and objectively measured sleep duration among white, black, Hispanic, and Chinese adults in the United States: multi-                          |
| [70]      | ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Sleep 2018;41(6):1 e 12. Bianchi MT, Williams KL, Mckinney S, Ellenbogen JM. The subjective- objective mismatch in sleep perception among those with insomnia and                                                                                                                   |
|           | discrepancy in patients with insomnia and sleep apnea. J Clin Sleep Med 2021;17(11):2155 e 63. Wang L, Guyatt GH, Kennedy SA, Romerosa B, Kwon HY, Kaushal A, et al. Predictors of persistent pain after breast cancer surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Can Med Assoc J 2016 |
| [72] [73] | Oct;188(14):E352 e 61. Lewis GN, Rice DA, McNair PJ, Kluger M. Predictors of persistent pain after total knee arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br Anaesth 2015;114(4):551 e 61.                                                                                                                  |
|           | J Skarpsno ES, Nilsen TIL, Mork PJ. The effect of long-term poor sleep quality on risk of back-related disability and the modifying role of physical ac-                                                                                                                                                             |
| [74]      | tivity. Sci Rep 2021;11(1):1 e 8.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| [75]      | Van Looveren E, Bilterys T, Munneke W, Cagnie B, Ickmans K, Mairesse O, et al. The association between sleep and chronic spinal pain: a systematic review from the last decade. J Clin Med 2021;10(17):3836. Shen S po, Wang Y jie, Zhang Q, Qiang H, sheng Weng X. Improved                                         |
| [76]      | perioperative sleep quality or quantity reduces pain after total hip or knee arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Orthop Surg e 97.                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [77]      | 2021;13(4):1389 Fadayomi AB, Ibala R, Bilotta F, Westover MB, Akeju O. A systematic re- view and meta-analysis examining the impact of sleep disturbance on postoperative delirium. Crit Care Med 2018;46(12):e1204 e 12.                                                                                            |
| * [78]    | Ip HYV, Abrishami A, Peng PWH, Wong J, Chung F. Predictors of post- operative pain and analgesic consumption: a qualitative systematic re- view. Anesthesiology 2009;111(3):657 e 77.                                                                                                                                |
| * [80]    | experience in healthy volunteers. Sleep 2007;30(9):1145 e 52. ammation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|           | Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Carroll JE. Sleep disturbance, sleep duration, and in /uniFB02 and experimental sleep deprivation. Biol Psychiatr 2016;80(1):40 e 52.                                                                                                                                                          |
| * [81]    | Smith MT, Quartana PJ, Okonkwo RM, Nasir A. Mechanisms by which sleep disturbance contributes to osteoarthritis pain: a conceptual model.                                                                                                                                                                            |
| [82] [83] | Curr Pain Headache Rep 2009;13(6):447 e 54. Marchand F, Perretti M, McMahon SB. Role of the immune system in chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 2005;6(7):521 e 32. Lund Håheim L, Nafstad P, Olsen I, Schwarze P, Rønningen KS. C-reactive                                                                              |
| [84]      | Health 2009;37(6):640 e 6. Zubieta J, Smith YR, Bueller JA, Xu Y, Kilbourn MR, Jewett DM, et al. Regional mu opioid receptor regulation of sensory and affective di- mensions of pain. Science 2001;293(5528):311 e 6. 80-.                                                                                          |
| [85]      | Smith MT, Edwards RR, McCann UD, Haythomthwaite JA. The effects of deprivation on pain inhibition and spontaneous pain in women. e 505.                                                                                                                                                                              |
|           | sleep Sleep 2007;30(4):494 /uniFB01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [86]      | Haack M, Simpson N, Sethna N, Kaur S, Mullington J. Sleep de ciency and chronic pain: potential underlying mechanisms and clinical implications. Neuropsychopharmacology 2020;45(1):205 e 16. Blaxton JM, Bergeman CS, Whitehead BR, Braun ME, Payne JD. Relation-                                                   |
| [87]      | ships among nightly sleep quality, daily stress, and daily affect. J Gerontol e 72.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [88]      | B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2017;72(3):363 De Wild-Hartmann JA, Wichers M, Van Bemmel AL, Derom C, Thiery E, Jacobs N, et al. Day-to-day associations between subjective sleep and affect in regard to future depression in a female population-based sample.                                                              |
|           | Br J Psychiatry 2013;202(6):407 e 12.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| * [89]    | Tang NKY, Salkovskis PM, Hodges A, Wright KJ, Hanna M, Hester J. Effects of mood on pain responses and pain tolerance: an experimental study in chronic back pain patients. Pain 2008;138(2):392 e 401.                                                                                                              |

- [90] Willoughby SG, Hailey BJ, Mulkana S, Rowe J. The effect of laboratoryinduced depressed mood state on responses to pain. Behav Med 2002;28(1):23 e 31.
- [91] O'Brien EM, Waxenberg LB, Atchison JW, Gremillion HA, Staud RM, McCrae CS, et al. Negative mood mediates the effect of poor sleep on pain among chronic pain patients. Clin J Pain 2010;26(4):310 e 9.
- [92] Watson D, Clark LATA. Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol 1988;54(6):1063 e 70.
- [93] Ravyts SG, Dzierzewski JM, Raldiris T, Perez E. Sleep and pain interference in individuals with chronic pain in mid- to late-life: the in /uniFB02 uence of negative and positive affect. J Sleep Res 2019;28(4):1 e 7.
- [94] Valrie CR, Gil KM, Redding-Lallinger R, Daeschner C. Brief report: daily mood as a mediator or moderator of the pain-sleep relationship in children with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Psychol 2008;33(3):317 e 22.
- [95] Evans S, Djilas V, Seidman LC, Zeltzer LK, Tsao JCI. Sleep quality, affect, pain, and disability in children with chronic pain: is affect a mediator or moderator? J Pain 2017;18(9):1087 e 95.
- [96] Raymond I, Ancoli-Israel S, Choiniere M. Sleep disturbances, pain and anal/C18 gesia in adults hospitalized for burn injuries. Sleep Med 2004;5(6):551 e 9.
- [97] Walker G. The opioid crisis: a 21st century pain. Drugs Today 2018;54: 283 e 6.
- [98] Baldini A, Von Korff M, Lin EH. A review of potential adverse effects of long-term opioid therapy: a practitioner's guide. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord 2012;14(2).
- [99] Aili K, Åstrom-Paulsson S, Stoetzer U, Svartengren M, Hillert L. Reliability € of actigraphy and subjective sleep measurements in adults: the design of sleep assessments. J Clin Sleep Med 2017;13(1):39 e 47.
- [100] Buysse DJ. Multidimensional sleep health: a conceptual overview. Innov Aging 2018;2(1):595.