<!-- image -->

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

## Nutrition, Metabolism &amp; Cardiovascular Diseases

j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nmcd

## SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS AND META-ANALYSES

## Sex differences in the association between short sleep duration and obesity: A systematic-review and meta-analysis

Maria G. Lange a,b,* , Christodoulos Neophytou c , Francesco P. Cappuccio a,d , Thomas M. Barber a,b , Samantha Johnson e , Yen-Fu Chen a

- a Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
- b Warwickshire Institute for the Study of Diabetes Endocrinology and Metabolism, University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire, Clifford Bridge

Road, Coventry, CV2 2DX, UK

- c Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Mindelsohn Way, Birmingham, B15 2GW, UK
- d Department of Medical Education, University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire, Clifford Bridge Road, Coventry, CV2 2DX, UK
- e Warwick University Library, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

Received 6 January 2024; received in revised form 11 June 2024; accepted 13 June 2024

Handling Editor: A. Siani

Available online 20 June 2024

## KEYWORDS

Systematic review; Meta-analysis; Sex differences; Obesity; Sleep duration

Abstract Aims: Obesity is a leading contributor to global morbidity and mortality. Short sleep duration is signi /uniFB01 cantly associated with the incidence of obesity, however, it remains unclear whether this relationship is in /uniFB02 uenced by sex. The purpose of this meta-analysis was to systematically evaluate the evidence of whether the association between short sleep duration and obesity differs between males and females.

Data synthesis: The protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42023374205). From inception through June 2023, Medline, Embase and Web of Science databases were searched for longitudinal cohort studies with minimum 12 months of observation. The quality of studies was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment for Cohort Studies. Results were pooled using a random effects model. Results are expressed as ratio of odds ratios (ROR) with 95% con /uniFB01 dence interval (CI). ROR directly estimates the relative strength of the association of interest (measured as odds ratio [OR] between females and males). Sensitivity analysis was performed and inconsistency between studies was assessed using I 2 statistics. A total of 4582 articles were retrieved with the search strategy, of which 6 were included. The meta-analysis indicated that the association between short sleep duration and obesity incidence was statistically signi /uniFB01 cant in both men [OR 1.26 (95% CI 1.13 e 1.40)] and women [OR 1.36 (95% CI 1.16 e 1.59)]. However, it did not differ signi /uniFB01 cantly between sexes ROR (women/men) 1.04 (95%CI 0.79 e 1.36; I 2 20.1%).

Conclusions: This meta-analysis indicates that women and men who subjectively report short sleep duration have similarly increased risks of incident obesity.

ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Italian Diabetes Society, the Italian Society for the Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition and the Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CI, con /uniFB01 dence interval; F, female; HR, hazard ratio; M, male; MOOSE, Meta-analysis of observational studies in epidemiology; OR, odds ratio; ROR, ratio of odds ratios; RR, risk ratio.

- * Corresponding author. Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, CV4 7AL, UK. E-mail address: maria.lange@warwick.ac.uk (M.G. Lange).

0939-4753/ ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Italian Diabetes Society, the Italian Society for the Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition and the Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## 1. Background

Obesity is one of the most important epidemics of the 21st century. Worldwide there are 650 million adults af /uniFB02 icted by obesity [1]. This disease is a key risk factor for the development of further cardiovascular and musculoskeletal complications, and global morbidity and mortality. Obesity is de /uniFB01 ned when an individual meets a body mass index (BMI) threshold, this varies between 25 and 30 kg/ m 2 depending on geographic location [2]. However, this simple classi /uniFB01 cation fails to capture the wide variability in disease phenotype. Sex is a key determinant of the obese phenotype in /uniFB02 uencing body fat content, distribution and association with metabolic diseases [3,4]. Moreover, the age-standardized obesity prevalence is higher in women (14.9%) than in men (10.8%) [5]. Despite the apparent sex dimorphism in obesity, at present there is insuf /uniFB01 cient evidence to provide sex-speci /uniFB01 c guidance for diagnosis and management. Understanding the signi /uniFB01 cance of obesity phenotypes is essential to addressing this growing public health phenomenon.

The aetiology of obesity is complex with genetic, socioeconomic and lifestyle factors implicated. Large systematic reviews have identi /uniFB01 ed an association between short sleep duration and obesity, however, it remains unclear whether this relationship is in /uniFB02 uenced by sex [6,7]. A systematic review in a paediatric population identi /uniFB01 ed evidence of sex patterning, with 9 studies showing an association between short sleep duration and obesity in boys alone, and only 3 studies showing the converse [8]. No systematic review in adults has been conducted to speci /uniFB01 cally answer this question. A few cross-sectional studies have identi /uniFB01 ed a potentially higher association between short sleep and female body composition [9 e 11]. Conversely, a rural Chinese cohort study found an association with abdominal obesity in men only, OR 1.60 (95% CI: 1.05 e 2.45) [12]. In their meta-analysis, Zhou et al. [7] argued that sex was likely the major source of heterogeneity in the association between short sleep duration and obesity. Guimaraes et al. [13] meta-analysis identi /uniFB01 ed an association between short sleep duration and obesity in both sexes (women: OR, 1.42 [95%CI, 1.10 e 1.81] and men: OR, 1.31 [95%CI, 1.04 e 1.66). However, a within study analysis of sex differences was not conducted. Consequently, the inconsistency in results requires further analysis to ascertain whether sex in /uniFB02 uences the link between short sleep duration and obesity.

It is physiologically plausible that the association between short sleep duration and obesity varies between men and women as the two sexes sleep differently. There are sex differences in the quality of sleep, in sleep duration and in sleep latency [14 e 16]. In the general population, adult women report a longer total sleep time than men [17]. Women also rate their sleep of lower quality than men [18]. Over the life course, sleep typically deteriorates with age in both sexes, however, there are speci /uniFB01 c periods in the female life course that predispose her to disordered sleeping namely; puberty, pregnancy and menopause [19]. Sex steroids are particularly implicated in female sleep physiology with clear variations in sleep across the menstrual cycle [20]. Speci /uniFB01 cally, raised levels of progesterone are associated with objective reductions in REM sleep [21]. Furthermore, evidence suggests that ' sleep debt , which is ' the difference between how much sleep a person gets versus how much they need, accumulates more rapidly in women [22].

Understanding the relationship between obesity risk factors and obesity phenotypes is essential to guiding disease prevention and management. The present systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to analyse the existing evidence to assess whether sex differences in /uniFB02 uence the association between short sleep duration and obesity. The results of this review could have potential implications for research into sex-speci /uniFB01 c obesity interventions.

## 2. Methods

This systematic review followed the Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) reporting guidelines [23]. The protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42023374205).

## 2.1. Literature search and selection criteria

We performed a systematic search for publications using Medline, EMBASE and Web of Sciences databases, from inception until the February 17, 2023 when the search was run. Search strategies used subject headings and key words ( see appendix for full search strategy ). The search strategy was developed with support from a University librarian. Searches were limited to the English language. The reference lists from articles that were chosen for full text review were manually screened and cited literature was reviewed.

Two reviewers (ML, CN) independently reviewed all identi /uniFB01 ed studies and selected studies based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria utilising Rayyan software [24]. Any disagreements were resolved by a third author (YC). Studies were included if they were longitudinal cohort studies, where the exposure was short sleep duration and the outcome was incidence of new-onset obesity with sex disaggregated data. Studies were included if there was a minimumof1yearofobservationand if they were conducted in the general adult ( /C21 18 years at baseline) populations. Studies were excluded if the population had pre-diagnosed sleep disorders, shift-work populations and hospital inpatients.

## 2.2. Data extraction and risk of bias assessment

One author (ML) extracted data from selected cohort studies and the extracted data was cross-checked by a second reviewer (CN). A predesigned electronic data extraction form was used to collect relevant data including authors, date of publication, study design, country of origin, selection criteria, population description (age, sex, number of participants included in analysis), methods of assessment of exposure, de /uniFB01 nition of sleep categories, de /uniFB01 nition of outcomes, method of outcome assessment,

statistical analysis, the odds ratio (OR) or hazard ratio (HR) with 95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals and adjustment variables. Where data was not readily available from the published articles, authors were contacted via email to obtain raw data.

The Newcastle-Ottawa Quality assessment validated scale was utilised in our study to assess the quality of cohort studies [25]. The scale focuses on three main areas: selection of study groups, comparability of cohorts and ascertainment of outcome of interest. It is a nine point based scale and depending on the number of points (stars) scored in each category, the individual study can receive an overall good, fair or poor quality score.

## 2.3. Statistical analysis

To avoid confounding by study-level characteristics, within study comparison of female and male odds ratios were made by calculating a ratio of odds ratios (ROR) for each study (methodology described in Appendix 7) [26]. ROR was obtained by dividing the odds ratio for the female group by the odds ratio for the male group. It provided an estimate of the relative strength (magnitude) of the association between short sleep duration and incident obesity for women versus men. A ROR of greater than 1 indicated that short sleep duration had a greater effect on obesity for women than for men, and vice versa.

Meta-analyses were carried out using STATA software, version 17.0 [27]. The meta-analyses used a random effects model and calculated pooled effects (95% con /uniFB01 dence intervals). A p-value of /C20 0.05 was considered statistically signi /uniFB01 cant. As the event of interest (incidence obesity) was relatively rare (well below 10 per 100 person-year), HR was used as an approximate estimate for OR in the metaanalyses to maximise the amount of data that could be included [28].

Discrepancy in effect estimates between studies (heterogeneity) was assessed using I 2 statistics and the chisquared test (Cochran Q test) [29]. A p-value of &lt; 0.10 was considered statistically signi /uniFB01 cant given the low power of the test. Sensitivity analysis was conducted by omitting one study at a time to assess the effects of a singly study on the overall pooled effect. Fixed effects model was performed as part of the sensitivity analysis. Planned subgroup analyses included exploring the in /uniFB02 uence of study quality, sleep assessment method and age. Of these only an analysis of study quality could be undertaken as the method of sleep assessment was the same across all studies and the ages of participants in studies overlapped signi /uniFB01 cantly. Post hoc analyses were undertaken by study design, exposure group classi /uniFB01 cation, control group classi /uniFB01 cation and outcome classi /uniFB01 cation.

Obesity incidence was calculated using raw data from the studies. The following formula was used (number of new cases of obesity)/(total population * follow-up time) and then multiplied by 1000 to give cases per 1000 personyears. This formula was used to calculate total obesity incidence, obesity incidence for men and obesity incidence for women.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Study identi /uniFB01 cation and selection

A total of 4582 articles were identi /uniFB01 ed in the initial search (Fig. 1). These records were screened with Rayyan software and 1828 duplicates were removed, of which 1650 were removed using the automated function in Rayyan with similarity set at 97%. The remaining 178 duplicate records were screened and removed manually by the reviewer. An additional four records were identi /uniFB01 ed through citation tracking. Two reviewers (ML, CN) independently screened 2746 articles by title and abstract and eliminated 2674 records as they did not meet eligibility criteria. A total of 72 articles were reviewed in full text, of which 17 potentially met the inclusion criteria. A further 11 articles were excluded due to insuf /uniFB01 cient data for analysis. Finally, 6 articles were included in the systematic review and metaanalysis.

## 3.2. Characteristics of selected studies

In the 6 studies selected (Table 1) a total of 132,472 people were included (39.89% women). The articles were published in English language between 2010 and 2021, from Japan (n Z 2), China (n Z 2), USA (n Z 1) and Spain (n Z 1). Sample sizes ranged from 7752 to 67,344 participants and female representation ranged from 7.3 to 59.8%. All studies were longitudinal cohort studies with follow-up time ranging from 1 to 7.5 years. Two studies were retrospective and four were prospective. Three studies selected participants from the general population, two studies selected participants from employees of local companies and one study selected participants from a database of University graduates.

All six studies measured sleep duration subjectively either through self-reported questionnaires or during structured interviews. Short sleep duration was classi /uniFB01 ed as less than 5 h/night in 4 studies [32 e 34,36], less than or equal to 6 h/night in one study [30] and less than 6.5 h/ night in the /uniFB01 nal study [35]. The classi /uniFB01 cation of the control group varied from 5 to 7 h/night to 8 h/night.

The outcome of obesity was based on body mass index (BMI). This was calculated based on self-reported height and weight in two studies and measured objectively using calibrated electronic scales in four studies. The BMI cut-off ranged from 24 to 30 kg/m . The BMI cut-off is set based 2 on the risk of developing obesity-related morbidity and mortality. The difference in global cut-offs is attributed to the higher risk of morbidity and mortality in Asian populations at a relatively lower weight than in Black, Hispanic and White individuals [37].

## 3.3. Quality of included studies

Based on the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale, /uniFB01 ve studies were classi /uniFB01 ed as ' good quality ' as they scored a minimum of 6 stars across the three categories and one study was

Figure 1 Flowchart of the study screening and selection process.

<!-- image -->

classi /uniFB01 ed as ' poor quality ' based on a /uniFB01 ve star score. Results are shown in Table 2.

## 3.5. Sex differences: short sleep duration and obesity

## 3.4. Obesity incidence

Raw data to calculate incidence of obesity was available in /uniFB01 ve out of six studies. There was signi /uniFB01 cant variability in incidence across the studies with total population incidence ranging between 6.51 cases/1000 person-years to 35.35 cases/1000 person-years. Obesity incidence ranged from 4.45 cases/1000 person-years to 29.72 cases/1000 person years in females and 9.09 cases/1000 person-years to 58.48 cases/1000 person-years in males (Table 1). None of the included studies reported incidence rate ratios. The studies with the highest obesity incidence tended to have lower BMI thresholds of 24 e 25 kg/m 2 [30,33], whereas the studies with lower incidence had a higher BMI threshold of 30 kg/m 2 [32,34].

The meta-analysis indicated that the association between short sleep duration and obesity incidence did not differ signi /uniFB01 cantly between sexes, pooled RORs for women versus men 1.04 (95%CI 0.79 e 1.36; I 2 20.1%) (Fig. 2). The I 2 statistic reveals that between study variance relative to total variance is fairly limited with 20.1% estimate. The wide con /uniFB01 dence intervals show signi /uniFB01 cant within study variation likely due to the outcome (incident obesity) being relatively rare in the majority of the studies.

## 3.6. Sex disaggregated: short sleep duration and obesity

The association between short sleep duration and obesity was found to be statistically signi /uniFB01 cant in both men and women [men: pooled OR 1.26 (95% CI 1.13 e 1.40, I 2 66.6%, P for heterogeneity 0.01), and women: pooled OR 1.36 (95%

| T: 32.19 b F: 29.72 Age, sex, educational level, smoking, alcohol intake, physical activity level,   | baseline BMI Data not available Age, eating habits, alcohol intake, smoking, exercise, mental complaints, hypertension, hyperglycemia, hypertri- glyceridaemia, HDL cholesterol smoking, total energy intake, consumption of sugared-soft drinks, fast food consumption, snacking, caffeine intake, alcohol intake, snoring, insomnia, siesta and   | Age, sex, physical activity,   | categories of sleep, baseline BMI Age, sex, physical activity, alcohol intake, rotating 8 h shift work, smoking, depressive symptoms F: OR 0.35 (95% CI: 0.05 M: OR 1.91 (95% CI: 1.36 F: OR 1.37 (95% CI:   | Age, race/ethnicity, marital status, educational level, self-reported health, smoking, alcohol intake, coffee consumption and   | baseline BMI. 1.06 Age, BMI, WC, physical activity, smoking, alcohol intake, education level, marital status, SBP, DBP, fasting plasma glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides and HDL cholesterol at baseline. F: OR 0.97 (95% CI: 0.60 M: OR 0.95 (95% CI: 0.55   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| M: 34.96                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | T: 6.51 F: 4.45 M: 9.09        | T: 35.35 F: 23.51 M: 58.48                                                                                                                                                                                   | T: 9.85 F: 9.84 M: 9.87                                                                                                         | T: 15.96 F: 18.33 M: 12.43                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| 6 8 24 kg/m 2a                                                                                       | 25 kg/m 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 30 kg/m 2                      | 25 kg/m 2                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 30 kg/m 2                                                                                                                       | 7.5 28 kg/m 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| /C20                                                                                                 | &lt; 5 5 e 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 7 e 8                          | 5 7 e 8                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 7 e 8                                                                                                                           | 6.5 e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| &gt; 18 (mean 46.7 /C6 15.8)                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | &lt; 5                            | &lt;                                                                                                                                                                                                            | &lt; 5                                                                                                                             | &lt; 6.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                      | &gt; 18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 20 e 90                        | 35 e 42                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 50 e 71                                                                                                                         | 18 e 75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| 7752 (52.8% F)                                                                                       | 12,323 (7.3% F)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 10,532 (55.5% F)               | 23,212 (13.7% F)                                                                                                                                                                                             | 67,344 (47.6% F)                                                                                                                | 11,318 (59.8% F)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Retrospective 7                                                                                      | Retrospective 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Prospective 6.5                | Prospective 1                                                                                                                                                                                                | Prospective 7.5                                                                                                                 | Prospective 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                      | Japan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Spain                          | Japan                                                                                                                                                                                                        | USA                                                                                                                             | China                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Huang, 2021 [30] China                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                      | Itani, 2011 [31]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Sayon-Orea, 2013 [32]          | Watanabe, 2010 [33]                                                                                                                                                                                          | Xiao, 2013 [34]                                                                                                                 | Zhou, 2020 [35]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

<!-- image -->

| Quality rating        | follow-up of Good quality: ++*+ +* +++ / /                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Good quality: ++++ +* ++* / /                                                                                                                   | Good quality: ++*+ +* ++* / /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | + Good quality: ++++ +* +++ / /                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                       | analysis controlled for confounders long enough for outcomes to occur? cohorts Age; educational level; smoking status; drinking status; physical activity level and baseline BMI + Independent blind assessment + Yes (7years) + Lost 12.5% to follow-up + | Independent blind assessment + Yes (7years) + No statement                                                                                      | + Self reported Yes (6.5years) + Lost 13.6% to follow-up +                                                                                                                                                                                                    | insomnia; siesta and categories of sleep; baseline BMI. + Age; physical activity; alcohol consumption; gender; rotating 8 h shift work; smoking; depressive Independent blind assessment + Yes (1year) + Lost 1.1% follow up |
| Comparability Outcome | nonexposed cohort exposure that outcome of interest was not present at start of study cohorts on the basis of the design or outcome + Written self report: self- reported questionnaire Yes: excluded obese participants at baseline +                     | + Yes: excluded obese participants at baseline + Age group; eating habits; drinking habits; smoking habits; exercise habits; mental complaints; | factors of CVD other than obesity. Written self report: mailed questionnaires Yes: excluded obese participants at baseline + Age; physical activity; smoking status; sitting; total energy intake; consumption of sugared-soft drinks; fast food consumption; | snacking between meals; caffeine intake; alcohol intake; snoring; Drawn from same community as exposed + Structured interview + Yes: excluded obese participants at baseline + symptoms +                                    |
| Selection             | Random cluster sampling to select a representative sample of the general population in 9 provinces in China. + Drawn from same community as exposed Employees of local government Drawn from same Structured interview                                     | organization who underwent annual medical checkups in Japan + community as exposed +                                                            | Drawn from same community as exposed +                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Employees of an electric power company distributed in 12 of 47 prefectures throughout Japan. +                                                                                                                               |
|                       | of the exposed cohort                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Huang et al. [30]                                                                                                                               | University graduates +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Itani et al. [31]                                                                                                                               | Sayon-Orea et al. [32]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Watanabe                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | et al. [33]                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Reference             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Forest plot of ratio of odds ratios (ROR) for women vs men and 95% CI of studies on the association between short sleep duration and obesity (Random effects model).

<!-- image -->

Figure 3 Forest plot of odds ratio (OR) and 95% CI of the effect of short sleep duration on incident obesity, strati /uniFB01 ed by sex.

<!-- image -->

CI 1.16 e 1.59, I 2 0.0%, P for heterogeneity 0.442)] (Fig. 3). These results suggest a signi /uniFB01 cant level of heterogeneity for men but not for women. However, the large I 2 value for men may be partly attributed to the small within-study variance for Itani et al. [31]. Watanabe et al. [33] showed no signi /uniFB01 cant prospective association between short sleep duration and obesity in women, despite a positive association in their cross-sectional data. The incidence of new

Figure 4 Forest plot of ratio of odds ratios (ROR) for women vs men and 95% CI of studies on the association between short sleep duration and obesity (Fixed effect model).

<!-- image -->

obesity was low in women (2.4%) relative to the general population.

## 3.7. Sensitivity analysis

Sensitivity analysis was conducted using the leave-one-out method which showed that no single study was a signi /uniFB01 -cant outlier and altered the result. Watanabe et al. [33] and Itani et al. [31] studies were signi /uniFB01 cant sources of heterogeneity. Data for both studies was collected during mandated annual medical check-up at a Japanese company and governmental institution, respectively. Both samples had a relatively small proportion of female participants 7.3 e 13.7%.

A /uniFB01 xed effect model was run as part of the sensitivity analysis (shown in Fig. 4). The inference from the results produced was similar to that of the random effects model. The /uniFB01 xed effect model pooled ROR was 1.04 (95% CI: 0.84 e 1.30) versus 1.04 (95%CI 0.79 e 1.36; I 2 20.1%) in the random effects model. As the random effects model accounts for two sources of variation a wider con /uniFB01 dence interval is expected.

## 3.8. Subgroup analyses

Post-hoc subgroup analysis did not reveal statistically signi /uniFB01 cant results for study design, outcome classi /uniFB01 cation or exposure classi /uniFB01 cation. Data were summarised in Table 3. Subgroup analysis could not be conducted for study quality as only one study [34] had poor quality whereas the remaining studies had good quality. Using the leaveone-out method to remove this study from analysis did not signi /uniFB01 cantly alter the results.

| Variable                                | Number of studies                       | Pooled ROR                              | Heterogeneity                           | Heterogeneity                           |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Variable                                |                                         | (95% CI)                                | P value                                 | I 2 (%)                                 |
| Study design                            | Study design                            | Study design                            | Study design                            | Study design                            |
| Retrospective                           | 2                                       | 1.18 (0.88 e 1.58)                      | 0.189                                   | 42.1%                                   |
| Prospective                             | 4                                       | 0.88 (0.63 e 1.24)                      | 0.397                                   | 0.0%                                    |
| Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.211 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.211 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.211 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.211 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.211 |
| Outcome (obesity de /uniFB01 nition)    | Outcome (obesity de /uniFB01 nition)    | Outcome (obesity de /uniFB01 nition)    | Outcome (obesity de /uniFB01 nition)    | Outcome (obesity de /uniFB01 nition)    |
| BMI (kg/m 2 ) Z 30 2                    |                                         | 0.90 (0.61 e 1.33)                      | 0.486                                   | 0.0%                                    |
| BMI (kg/m 2 ) &lt; 30                      | 4                                       | 1.12 (0.85 e 1.46)                      | 0.174                                   | 39.7%                                   |
| Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.372 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.372 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.372 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.372 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.372 |
| Exposure (short sleep duration)         | Exposure (short sleep duration)         | Exposure (short sleep duration)         | Exposure (short sleep duration)         | Exposure (short sleep duration)         |
| &lt; 6.5 h/night                           | 2                                       | 1.05 (0.77 e 1.42)                      | 0.936                                   | 0.0%                                    |
| &lt; 5 h/night                             | 4                                       | 1.04 (0.75 e 1.43)                      | 0.100                                   | 52%                                     |
| Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.959 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.959 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.959 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.959 | Test for subgroup differences P Z 0.959 |

ROR: ratio of odds ratios, CI: con /uniFB01 dence interval, BMI: body mass index.

## 4. Discussion

For the /uniFB01 rst time, this study provides a unique metaanalysis design to speci /uniFB01 cally examine the sex differences in the association between short sleep duration and obesity in longitudinal cohort studies. This was achieved through calculating ratio of odds ratios (ROR) for each study to avoid confounding by study-level characteristics. Our results shows a consistent pattern of increased odds of incident obesity in short sleepers in both men and women following a minimum of 1 year of observation. However, there is no evidence of statistically signi /uniFB01 cant sex differences in this association. Consequently, we can conclude

that women and men who subjectively report short sleep duration have a similar risk of incident obesity. These /uniFB01 ndings have signi /uniFB01 cant implications for clinical practice highlighting that healthcare professionals should proactively enquire about sleep duration for both men and women in the prevention and management of obesity, and support patients in optimising sleep duration.

The /uniFB01 ndings of this study are to some degree unexpected as there is biological and epidemiological data that supports the hypothesis that sex differences may exist in the association between short sleep duration and obesity. In the general population, adult women sleep longer than men (p &lt; 0.001), [17]. Women tend to have more frequent night time awakenings with complaints of poor sleep quality, whilst men have later sleep onset and more social jetlag, whichisthemeandifferenceinsleeptimebetweenworking days and work-free days [14,15]. Population based studies, such as the cross-sectional Cardia Study proposed that a stronger association between self-reported sleep duration and body composition may exist in women [9]. Findings from the cross-sectional NHANES study looking speci /uniFB01 cally at sex differences in short sleep duration and obesity identi /uniFB01 ed that women have increased odds of obesity OR 1.22 (95% CI 1.01 e 1.49) however, the difference was not statistically signi /uniFB01 cantwhencomparedtomenOR0.98(95% CI 0.86 e 1.12) [11]. In paediatric populations, a metaanalysis identi /uniFB01 ed a stronger association between short sleep duration and obesity in boys than in girls [OR Z 2.50 (95% CI 1.88 e 3.34) versus 1.24 (95% CI 1.07 e 1.45)] [38].

Three previous meta-analyses on the association between short sleep duration and obesity in adults in cohort studies, strati /uniFB01 ed their analysis by sex and reported similar /uniFB01 ndings to ours [7,13,39]. Namely, two studies showed that an association between short sleep duration and incident obesity exists in both sexes. Zhou et al. [7] strati /uniFB01 ed analysis by sex, revealing no sex difference in RR of general obesity, with men s risk ratio (RR) 1.12 (95% CI 0.99 ' e 1.27) and women s RR 1.08 (95% CI 1.03 ' e 1.12). Our review has the advantages of including more studies in the analysis than any of the previous meta-analyses.

The mechanisms underlying the association between short sleep duration and incident obesity are not fully understood. Magee et al. [40] suggest three pathways through which sleep deprivation alters energy balance and promotes obesity. Firstly, sleep restriction leads to an alteration in metabolic hormones namely, a rise in ghrelin and a reduction in leptin which increases appetite. Secondly, sleep restriction reduces the utilization of glucose which promotes the perception of hunger. Lastly, fatigue from reduced sleep leads to a reduction in energy expenditure.

Contrary to these proposed theories, in their study Nishiura et al. [41] demonstrated a signi /uniFB01 cant longitudinal association between short sleep and incidence obesity in men but this relationship was not mediated by dietary preferences suggesting that an alternate pathway must be in /uniFB02 uencing this association. Furthermore, Vgontzas et al. [42] suggested that other factors might also be implicated in the relationship between short sleep duration and obesity. In their longitudinal study, they identi /uniFB01 ed that the association between subjective short sleep duration and incident obesity was mediated by reported poor sleep and emotional stress, and that objectively measured short sleep duration did not predict obesity incidence. Following strati /uniFB01 cation by sex, the effect of emotional stress was a stronger predictor of obesity in women and complaints of poor sleep were a stronger predictor in men.

These two studies were not included in the review as sex disaggregated data was not extractable. Nevertheless, they raised two important considerations relevant to our /uniFB01 ndings. Firstly, about the potential limitation of subjective sleep duration measurement. All six studies included in this review measured sleep duration subjectively via selfreporting. Several studies have identi /uniFB01 ed an overestimation of sleep durationwhen measured subjectively as compared to objective recording using actigraphy or polysomnography [43,44]. Lauderdale et al. [44] found moderate correlation (0.47) between objective and subjective measurements with evidence of signi /uniFB01 cant bias from systematic overestimating of subjective sleep duration. No signi /uniFB01 cant difference was found between reporting of sleep in men and women. Future research studies should utilise objective measures of sleep duration rather than subjective.

The second consideration relates to factors that mediate subjective reporting of sleep such as poor sleep and emotional stress. In their meta-analysis, Fatima et al. [45] identi /uniFB01 ed an association between obesity and poor sleep quality independent of sleep duration, highlighting that these are two separate dimensions of sleep. Some studies suggest that women s sleep quality is more signi ' /uniFB01 cantly affected by psychosocial stressors than men s sleep. During ' the /uniFB01 rst lockdown of the COVID-19 pandemic, women reported higher levels of sleep problems due to psychological distress than men [46]. Following traumatic stress women are more likely than men to experience insomnia and nightmares [47]. Data from adolescents show a sex difference in perceived sleep health which becomes less clear when sleep is measured objectively [21]. Moreover, from a sociological perspective, societal norms can have different impacts on a sex s sleep. The presence of children ' in a family has been identi /uniFB01 ed as a contributing factor to insuf /uniFB01 cient sleep, disproportionately affecting women who tend to be the primary caregivers [48]. Future research should incorporate measures of sleep quality rather than sleep duration alone, as well as explore the relationship between perceived sleep and objectively measured sleep in both sexes.

## 4.1. Strengths and limitations

A major strength of this review was the large number of participants included from prospective studies, as well as the inclusion of longitudinal cohort studies allowing for the accurate analysis of the temporal relationship between sleep duration and obesity. This was particularly important due to the bidirectional relationship between obesity and sleep disturbance [49]. Furthermore, all but one included study were of high quality as assessed by the NewcastleOttawa scale. Finally, a signi /uniFB01 cant advantage of our

methodology is the preservation of the comparison between women and men within individual studies, which avoided confounding by study-level characteristics. No previous studies to date had adopted this statistical approach.

Several limitations of this study need to be taken into account. Firstly, the potential bias introduced from selfreported sleep duration mayhaveimpacted ontheobserved association. Nevertheless, literature supports good correlation between subjectively reported and objectively measuredsleep duration [44,50]. Secondly, albeit all studies controlled for confounders, each study adjusted for slightly different variables. Thirdly, publication bias is dif /uniFB01 cult to ascertain for observational studies due to lack of compulsory prospective registration. Furthermore, the use of funnel plot and test for its asymmetry are not recommended when the number of studies is less than 10 [51]. Lastly, a limitation of our meta-analysis was the inability to extract data from 11 potentially eligible studies. The total number of participants across these studies was 64,007, compared to 132,472 people who were included in our analysis. These studies included 9 prospective and 2 retrospective studies. Seven of these studies found a signi /uniFB01 cant association between short sleep duration and incident obesity. Nine of these studies adjusted for sex in their analysis. Two studies commented that there was no signi /uniFB01 cant association after strati /uniFB01 cation by sex [52,53], and one stated that both men and women had an association between short sleep duration and obesity [54]. Yao et al. [55] found no association between total sleep duration (night and daytime siesta combined) and obesity after strati /uniFB01 cation by sex, however, conversely to other studies they found that females with short night time sleep duration had a reduced risk of overweight (HR 0.50, 95% CI: 0.38 e 0.67).

This limitation highlights the wider issue of authors not publishing sex-disaggregated data in medical research. A cross-sectional study of Cochrane Reviews identi /uniFB01 ed that sex consideration was frequently missing with less than 15% of studies considering the impact of sex on their /uniFB01 ndings [56]. Kocher et al. [57] argued that the lack of sexdisaggregated data for the COVID-19 epidemic, an evidently sexually dimorphic disorder, hindered the generation of evidence-based guidance. There is a pressing need for researchers worldwide to acknowledge the sex gap in data and address this in their research by including sex as a key variable. In 2015, the National Institutes of Health amended their grant application and made the inclusion of sex as a biological variable compulsory [58]. This is further supported by the WHO and UN Women who emphasize the role of sex disaggregated data in identifying and addressing global sex and gender inequalities [59,60].

## 4.2. Application of results

The results of our meta-analysis complement data in infants, children and adolescents [61] providing evidence for clinicians and the general public to advocate for adequate sleep duration in order to reduce the risk of incident obesity. Our results support the notion that sleep should be considered one of the pillars of a healthy lifestyle, alongside exercise and diet [62]. The recognition of the importance of sleep for mental and physical health, should galvanize governments worldwide to develop policies that encourage sleep suf /uniFB01 ciency. This guidance should apply to both men and women equally.

Going forward researchers in the /uniFB01 eld of sleep and obesity should consider utilising objective measures of sleep duration to reduce overestimation bias. Furthermore, other measures of sleep should be considered when studying the relationship with obesity such as sleep quality, latency, maintenance, ef /uniFB01 ciency and REM quantity. Moreover, further research is needed to explore the difference between perceived sleep and objectively measured sleep parameters, and particularly how this is in /uniFB02 uenced by sex. Lastly, future research should explore the mechanisms linking short sleep duration and obesity in men and women, with particular attention to the impact on appetite hormones and the interplay with sex hormones.

Finally, studies into sex differences should not be an isolated /uniFB01 eld of medical research but should be a widespread practice to allow the research community to address the sex gap in data.

## 5. Conclusion

This systematic review of cohort studies provides evidence that self-reported short sleep duration is signi /uniFB01 cantly associated with higher incidence of obesity in both women and men. There is no evidence for a signi /uniFB01 cant sex difference in this association with both sexes being at equal risk. Considering the relatively low number of studies with sex disaggregated data, further studies with strati /uniFB01 ed data are needed to con /uniFB01 rm our /uniFB01 ndings.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable.

## Consent for publication

Not applicable.

## Availability of data and materials

The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## Funding

Not applicable.

## Author s contribution '

ML: methodology, literature search, data extraction, analysis, writing of original draft and editing.

- CN: literature search, data extraction; FC: conceptualisation, editing, supervision; TB: conceptualisation, editing, supervision.
- SJ: literature search strategy.
- YC: conceptualisation, methodology, editing, supervision.

## Declaration of competing interest

None of the authors has any con /uniFB02 ict of interest.

## Acknowledgements

Not applicable.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2024.06.008.

## References

- [1] World Health Organization. Obesity and overweight fact sheet. 2021. Available from: https://www.who.int/news-room/factsheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight.
- [2] Weir CB, Jan A. BMI Classi /uniFB01 cation Percentile And Cut Off Points. [Updated 2023 Jun 26]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan. Available from: https://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK541070/.
- [3] Palmer BF, Clegg DJ. The sexual dimorphism of obesity. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2015;402:113 e 9.
- [4] Yang Y, Xie M, Yuan S, Zeng Y, Dong Y, Wang Z, et al. Sex differences in the associations between adiposity distribution and cardiometabolic risk factors in overweight or obese individuals: a cross-sectional study. BMC Publ Health 2021;21(1):1232.
- [5] Inoue Y, Qin B, Poti J, Sokol R, Gordon-Larsen P. Epidemiology of obesity in adults: latest trends. Curr Obes Rep 2018;7(4):276 e 88.
- [6] Cappuccio FP, Taggart FM, Kandala NB, Currie A, Peile E, Stranges S, et al. Meta-analysis of short sleep duration and obesity in children and adults. Sleep 2008;31(5):619 e 26.
- [7] Zhou Q, Zhang M, Hu D. Dose-response association between sleep duration and obesity risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Sleep Breath 2019;23(4):1035 e 45.
- [8] Morrissey B, Taveras E, Allender S, Strugnell C. Sleep and obesity among children: a systematic review of multiple sleep dimensions. Pediatr Obes 2020;15(4):e12619.
- [9] St-Onge MP, Perumean-Chaney S, Desmond R, Lewis CE, Yan LL, Person SD, et al. Gender differences in the association between sleep duration and body composition: the Cardia study. Internet J Endocrinol 2010;2010:726071.
- [10] Ogilvie RP, Bazzano LA, Gustat J, Harville EW, Chen W, Patel SR. Sex and race differences in the association between sleep duration and adiposity: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Sleep Health 2019;5(1):84 e 90.
- [11] Mercy UC, Elenwa F, Ogunsola AS, Eniola OA, Yunusa I, Karaye IM. Sex differences in the association between short sleep duration and obesity among US adults: /uniFB01 ndings from NHANES, 2015-2020. Sleep Med 2022;92:59 e 63.
- [12] Zhou Q, Wu X, Zhang D, Liu L, Wang J, Cheng R, et al. Age and sex differences in the association between sleep duration and general and abdominal obesity at 6-year follow-up: the rural Chinese cohort study. Sleep Med 2020;69:71 e 7.
- [13] Guimaraes KC, Silva CM, Latorraca COC, Oliveira RA, Crispim CA. Is self-reported short sleep duration associated with obesity? A systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Nutr Rev 2022;80(5):983 e 1000.
- [14] Mallampalli MP, Carter CL. Exploring sex and gender differences in sleep health: a Society for Womens Health Research Report. J ' Womens Health (Larchmt) 2014;23(7):553 e 62.
- [15] Jonasdottir SS, Minor K, Lehmann S. Gender differences in nighttime sleep patterns and variability across the adult lifespan: a global-scale wearables study. Sleep 2021;44(2).
- [16] Lok R, Qian J, Chellappa SL. Sex differences in sleep, circadian rhythms, and metabolism: implications for precision medicine. Sleep Med Rev 2024;75:101926.
- [17] Kocevska D, Lysen TS, Dotinga A, Koopman-Verhoeff ME, Luijk M, Antypa N, et al. Sleep characteristics across the lifespan in 1.1 million people from The Netherlands, United Kingdom and United States: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nat Human Behav 2021;5(1):113 e 22.
- [18] Vitiello MV, Larsen LH, Moe KE. Age-related sleep change: gender and estrogen effects on the subjective-objective sleep quality relationships of healthy, noncomplaining older men and women. J Psychosom Res 2004;56(5):503 e 10.
- [19] Mong JA, Cusmano DM. Sex differences in sleep: impact of biological sex and sex steroids. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2016;371(1688):20150110.
- [20] Baker FC, Lee KA. Menstrual cycle effects on sleep. Sleep Med Clin 2018;13(3):283 e 94.
- [21] Elkhatib Smidt SD, Hitt T, Zemel BS, Mitchell JA. Sex differences in childhood sleep and health implications. Ann Hum Biol 2021; 48(6):474 e 84.
- [22] Wright CJ, Milosavljevic S, Pocivavsek A. The stress of losing sleep: sex-speci /uniFB01 c neurobiological outcomes. Neurobiol Stress 2023;24: 100543.
- [23] Stroup DF, Berlin JA, Morton SC, Olkin I, Williamson GD, Rennie D, et al. Meta-analysis of observational studies in epidemiology: a proposal for reporting. Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) group. JAMA 2000;283(15):2008 e 12.
- [24] Ouzzani M, Hammady H, Fedorowicz Z, Elmagarmid A. Rayyan-a webandmobileappforsystematicreviews.SystRev2016;5(1):210.
- [25] Wells GA, Shea B, O Connell D, Peterson J, Welch V, Losos M, et al. ' The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-analyses. Available from: https:// www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical\_epidemiology/oxford.asp; 2021.
- [26] Song F, Xiong T, Parekh-Bhurke S, Loke YK, Sutton AJ, Eastwood AJ, et al. Inconsistency between direct and indirect comparisons of competing interventions: meta-epidemiological study. BMJ 2011; 343:d4909.
- [27] Support ST. Stata statistical sofware: release 17. College, Station, TX: StataCorp LLC; 2021.
- [28] Hennekens CH, Buring JE. In: Mayrent SL, editor. Epidemiology in medicine. Boston, Massachusetts: Little, Brown; 1987.
- [29] Aromataris E, Lockwood C, Porritt K, Pilla B, Jordan Z. JBI manual for evidence synthesis. JBI; 2024.
- [30] Huang X, Xu W, Chen R, Jiang Y, Li J, Xu S. Association between sleep duration and weight gain and incident overweight/obesity: longitudinal analyses from the China Health and Nutrition Survey. Sleep Breath 2021;25(2):1187 e 94.
- [31] Itani O, Kaneita Y, Murata A, Yokoyama E, Ohida T. Association of onset of obesity with sleep duration and shift work among Japanese adults. Sleep Med 2011;12(4):341 e 5.
- [32] Sayon-Orea C, Bes-Rastrollo M, Carlos S, Beunza JJ, BasterraGortari FJ, Martinez-Gonzalez MA. Association between sleeping hours and siesta and the risk of obesity: the SUN mediterranean cohort. Obes Facts 2013;6(4):337 e 47.
- [33] WatanabeM,KikuchiH,TanakaK,TakahashiM.Associationofshort sleep duration with weight gain and obesity at 1-year follow-up: a large-scale prospective study. Sleep 2010;33(2):161 e 7.
- [34] Xiao Q, Arem H, Moore SC, Hollenbeck AR, Matthews CE. A large prospective investigation of sleep duration, weight change, and obesity in the NIH-aarp diet and health study cohort. Am J Epidemiol 2013;178(11):1600 e 10.
- [35] Zhou QG, Wu XY, Zhang DD, Liu LL, Wang J, Cheng RR, et al. Age and sex differences in the association between sleep duration and general and abdominal obesity at 6-year follow-up: the rural Chinese cohort study. Sleep Med 2020;69:71 e 7.
- [36] Itani O, Kaneita Y, Murata A, Yokoyama E, Ohida T. Association of onset of obesity with sleep duration and shift work among Japanese adults. Sleep Med 2011;12(4):341 e 5.
- [37] Hunma S, Ramuth H, Miles-Chan JL, Schutz Y, Montani JP, Joonas N, et al. Body composition-derived BMI cut-offs for overweight and obesity in Indians and Creoles of Mauritius: comparison with Caucasians. Int J Obes 2016;40(12):1906 e 14.

- [38] Chen X, Beydoun MA, Wang Y. Is sleep duration associated with childhood obesity? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obesity 2008;16(2):265 e 74.
- [39] WuY, Zhai L, Zhang D. Sleep duration and obesity among adults: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Sleep Med 2014;15(12): 1456 e 62.
- [40] Magee CA, Huang XF, Iverson DC, Caputi P. Examining the pathways linking chronic sleep restriction to obesity. J Obes 2010;2010.
- [41] Nishiura C, Noguchi J, Hashimoto H. Dietary patterns only partially explain the effect of short sleep duration on the incidence of obesity. Sleep 2010;33(6):753 e 7.
- [42] Vgontzas AN, Fern, ez-Mendoza J, Miksiewicz T, Kritikou I, Shaffer ML, et al. Unveiling the longitudinal association between short sleep duration and the incidence of obesity: the Penn State Cohort. Int J Obes 2014;38(6):825 e 32.
- [43] Silva GE, Goodwin JL, Sherrill DL, Arnold JL, Bootzin RR, Smith T, et al. Relationship between reported and measured sleep times: the sleep heart health study (SHHS). J Clin Sleep Med 2007;3(6): 622 e 30.
- [44] Lauderdale DS, Knutson KL, Yan LL, Liu K, Rathouz PJ. Self-reported and measured sleep duration: how similar are they? Epidemiology 2008;19(6):838 e 45.
- [45] Fatima Y, Doi SA, Mamun AA. Sleep quality and obesity in young subjects: a meta-analysis. Obes Rev 2016;17(11):1154 e 66.
- [46] Ding X, Brazel DM, Mills MC. Gender differences in sleep disruption during COVID-19: cross-sectional analyses from two UK nationally representative surveys. BMJ Open 2022;12(4):e055792.
- [47] Kobayashi I, Howell MK. Impact of traumatic stress on sleep and management options in women. Sleep Med Clin 2018;13(3): 419 e 31.
- [48] Chattu VK, Manzar MD, Kumary S, Burman D, Spence DW, PandiPerumal SR. The global problem of insuf /uniFB01 cient sleep and its serious public health implications. Healthcare 2018;7(1).
- [49] Cappuccio FP, Miller MA. Is prolonged lack of sleep associated with obesity? BMJ 2011;342:d3306.
- [50] Lucas-Thompson RG, Crain TL, Brossoit RM. Measuring sleep duration in adolescence : comparing subjective and objective daily methods. Sleep Health 2021;7(1):79 e 82.
- [51] Sterne JA, Sutton AJ, Ioannidis JP, Terrin N, Jones DR, Lau J, et al. Recommendations for examining and interpreting funnel plot
- asymmetry in meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2011;343:d4002.
- [52] Nagai M, Tomata Y, Watanabe T, Kakizaki M, Tsuji I. Association between sleep duration, weight gain, and obesity for long period. Sleep Med 2013;14(2):206 e 10.
- [53] Hasler G, Buysse DJ, Klaghofer R, Gamma A, Ajdacic V, Eich D, et al. The association between short sleep duration and obesity in young adults: a 13-year prospective study. Sleep 2004;27(4):661 e 6.
- [54] Kobayashi D, Takahashi O, Deshpande GA, Shimbo T, Fukui T. Association between weight gain, obesity, and sleep duration: a large-scale 3-year cohort study. Sleep Breath 2012;16(3):829 e 33.
- [55] Yao F, Ma J, Qin P, Tu X, Li X, Tang XY. Age and sex differences in the association of sleep duration and overweight/obesity among Chinese participants age above 45 Years: a cohort study. J Nutr Health Aging 2022;26(7):714 e 22.
- [56] Antequera A, Cuadrado-Conde MA, Roy-Vallejo E, MontoyaMartinez M, Leon-Garcia M, Madrid-Pascual O, et al. Lack of sexrelated analysis and reporting in Cochrane Reviews: a crosssectional study. Syst Rev 2022;11(1):281.
- [57] Kocher K, Delot-Vilain A, Spencer D, LoTempio J, Delot EC. Paucity and disparity of publicly available sex-disaggregated data for the COVID-19 epidemic hamper evidence-based decision-making. Arch Sex Behav 2021;50(2):407 e 26.
- [58] Health NIo. Consideration of sex as a biological variable in NIHfunded research, notice number: not-OD-15-102. In: Services DoHaH; 2015.
- [59] Organization WH. Closing data gaps in gender. WHO; 2023. Available from: https://www.who.int/activities/closing-data-gapsin-gender.
- [60] Women U. Gender statistics and sex-disaggregated data 2023. Available from: https://www.unwomen.org/en/un-womenstrategic-plan-2022-2025/statistics-and-data.
- [61] Guo Y, Miller MA, Cappuccio FP. Short duration of sleep and incidence of overweight or obesity in Chinese children and adolescents: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Nutr Metabol Cardiovasc Dis 2021;31(2):363 e 71.
- [62] Matricciani L, Bin YS, Lallukka T, Kronholm E, Wake M, Paquet C, et al. Rethinking the sleep-health link. Sleep Health 2018;4(4): 339 e 48.